Sound the Alarm - Detection and Response







module 1



Incident - An occurrence that actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful authority, the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or an information system; or constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies.


Events - An observable occurrence on a network, system, or device



The 5 W's of an incident:
Who triggered the incident
What happened
When the incident took place
where the incident tool place 
why the incident occurred




Incident handler's journal - A form of documentation used to incident response.






Computer security incident response teams (CSIRT) - A specialized group of security professionals that are trained in incident management and response.



Roles in CSIRT:
Security analyst
Technical lead
Incident coordinator











# Incident Response Teams and Security Operations Centers

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) created an Incident Response Lifecycle framework that helps organizations handle cybersecurity incidents effectively. The framework contains four major stages:

* Preparation
* Detection and Analysis
* Containment, Eradication, and Recovery
* Post-Incident Activity

Security teams work together to monitor systems, identify threats, and respond quickly to incidents. Two important groups involved in this process are the Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) and the Security Operations Center (SOC).

## Command, Control, and Communication

A Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) is a group of cybersecurity professionals responsible for managing and responding to security incidents. Effective incident response depends on three important elements:

* **Command:** Leadership and direction during an incident
* **Control:** Managing technical operations, resources, and task assignments
* **Communication:** Keeping all stakeholders informed throughout the incident

Having clearly defined responsibilities allows teams to respond more efficiently and reduce confusion during critical situations.

## Common Roles in a CSIRT

The structure of a CSIRT differs between organizations. Some companies maintain a dedicated response team, while others create temporary task forces when incidents occur. CSIRTs often include both security and nonsecurity personnel such as legal teams, human resources, IT staff, management, and public relations.

### Security Analyst

Security analysts continuously watch systems and networks for suspicious activity. Their duties often include:

* Monitoring and analyzing security alerts
* Investigating the root cause of incidents
* Escalating serious threats to senior team members
* Resolving lower-level alerts when possible

### Technical Lead

Technical leads manage the technical side of incident response. Their responsibilities include:

* Identifying the source of the incident
* Developing strategies for containment and recovery
* Applying patches, updates, or fixes
* Coordinating with other departments to reduce operational disruption

### Incident Coordinator

Incident coordinators help maintain communication between departments during a security incident. Their responsibilities include:

* Coordinating with internal and external teams
* Sharing incident updates with stakeholders
* Ensuring communication remains organized and clear

Depending on the organization, this role may also be called an incident manager or incident commander.

### Additional CSIRT Roles

Some organizations also include specialized positions such as:

* Communications lead
* Legal advisor
* Planning coordinator

## Security Operations Center (SOC)

A Security Operations Center (SOC) is a dedicated team responsible for monitoring systems, networks, and devices for cyber threats. SOC teams are commonly associated with blue team operations, which focus on defending an organization against attacks.

## SOC Structure and Responsibilities

SOC teams are typically organized into different levels based on experience and responsibilities.

### Tier 1 SOC Analyst (L1)

Entry-level analysts handle the initial review of security alerts. Their responsibilities include:

* Monitoring and prioritizing alerts
* Creating and managing tickets in ticketing systems
* Escalating complex incidents to higher tiers

### Tier 2 SOC Analyst (L2)

L2 analysts have more experience and perform deeper investigations. Their responsibilities include:

* Investigating escalated alerts
* Tuning and configuring security tools
* Assisting with incident response activities
* Reporting findings to SOC leadership

### Tier 3 SOC Lead (L3)

SOC leads are senior analysts who oversee technical operations. Their responsibilities include:

* Supervising SOC teams
* Conducting advanced threat detection and analysis
* Performing malware and forensic investigations
* Reporting major findings to management

### SOC Manager

The SOC manager oversees the entire SOC operation. Their responsibilities include:

* Hiring and training team members
* Measuring team performance
* Preparing compliance and incident reports
* Communicating security updates to executives and stakeholders

## Specialized SOC Roles

### Forensic Investigators

These professionals gather and analyze digital evidence to understand how incidents occurred and determine their impact.

### Threat Hunters

Threat hunters proactively search for advanced or hidden threats using threat intelligence and advanced detection methods.












Incident response plan - A document that outlines the procedures to take in each step of incident response.


Elements of an incident plan:
Incident response procedures
System information
Other documents






Tool types:
Detection and management tools
Documentation tools
Investigative tools






Documentation - Any form of recorded content that is used for a specific purpose.


Types of documentation:
Playbooks
Incident handler's journals
Policies
Plans
Final reports



Playbooks - A manual that provides details about any operational action.


Intrusions detection system (IDS) - An application that monitors system and network activity and produces alerts on possible intrusions.


Intrusions prevention system (IPS) - An application that monitors system activity for intrusions and take action to stop the activity.



IDS and IPS tools:
snort
Seek
kismet
Sagan
Suricata









# Detection Tools in Cybersecurity

## Importance of Detection Tools

Detection tools in cybersecurity serve a purpose similar to alarm systems used in homes. Just as home security systems watch for unauthorized entry, cybersecurity detection tools monitor computer systems and networks for suspicious or malicious activity. Organizations rely on these tools to identify potential threats early and reduce the risk of security breaches.

These tools continuously observe network traffic, user behavior, and system events. When unusual activity is identified, they generate alerts so security teams can investigate and respond quickly before major damage occurs.

## Types of Detection Tools

Security analysts commonly work with three major categories of detection technologies:

* Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)
* Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS)
* Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)

Each tool provides different capabilities.

| Capability                     | IDS | IPS | EDR |
| ------------------------------ | --- | --- | --- |
| Detects suspicious activity    | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Prevents attacks automatically | ✗   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Records system activity        | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Sends security alerts          | ✓   | ✓   | ✓   |
| Uses behavioral analysis       | ✗   | ✗   | ✓   |

---

# Intrusion Detection System (IDS)

An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) monitors systems and network activity for signs of possible attacks or unauthorized behavior. Its primary purpose is to detect suspicious events and notify security personnel.

An IDS only identifies and reports threats; it does not block or stop them. Security analysts must review the alerts and take action if necessary.

For example, if a login attempt occurs from an unfamiliar IP address or at an unusual time, the IDS may generate an alert to warn the security team.

Common IDS tools include:

* Zeek
* Suricata
* Snort
* Sagan

## Detection Outcomes

Security analysts must understand four common alert outcomes generated by detection systems:

### True Positive

A legitimate attack is detected correctly.

### True Negative

No malicious activity exists, and no alert is triggered.

### False Positive

Normal activity is incorrectly flagged as malicious. These alerts waste time because analysts investigate threats that are not real.

### False Negative

Malicious activity occurs, but the system fails to detect it. This is especially dangerous because attacks may continue unnoticed.

---

# Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)

An Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) works similarly to an IDS but includes the ability to actively stop threats.

In addition to detecting suspicious behavior and generating alerts, an IPS can automatically take defensive actions, such as:

* Blocking malicious traffic
* Updating firewall or router rules
* Preventing unauthorized access

For instance, an IPS might detect harmful traffic targeting a server and immediately block the source IP address.

Some tools, such as Suricata, Snort, and Sagan, can function as both IDS and IPS solutions.

---

# Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)

Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) tools focus on monitoring endpoint devices connected to a network. Endpoints include devices such as:

* Desktop computers
* Laptops
* Smartphones
* Tablets

EDR solutions collect and analyze activity data directly from these devices to identify suspicious behavior.

Unlike traditional IDS or IPS tools, EDR platforms use behavioral analysis, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to recognize unusual patterns and advanced threats.

EDR systems can also respond automatically to threats without requiring manual action from security teams.

For example, if an unfamiliar or suspicious process begins running on a workstation, the EDR tool may automatically stop the process to prevent damage.

Examples of EDR tools include:

* Open EDR
* Bitdefender Endpoint Detection and Response
* FortiEDR

## Additional Note

Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) platforms also include detection and alerting features. These tools help security teams collect, analyze, and manage security events from multiple sources across an organization.












SIEM process:
1. Collect and aggregate data
2. Normalize data
3. Analyze data




Security Orchestration, automation and response (SOAR) - A collection of applications, tools, and workflows that uses automation to respond to security events.













# Advantages and Process of SIEM Tools

## Benefits of SIEM Tools

Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) tools help organizations collect, manage, and analyze security-related information from multiple systems and devices. These tools improve visibility across networks and support security teams during investigations and incident response.

Some major advantages of SIEM solutions include:

### Access to Security Event Data

SIEM platforms gather data from many devices and systems connected to a network. This includes both historical and real-time event information. Since organizations may operate hundreds of devices, SIEM tools centralize this information so analysts can easily access it from one location.

### Continuous Monitoring and Alerting

SIEM systems constantly monitor network and system activity. They use predefined rules and detection logic to identify suspicious behavior. When activity matches a security rule, the system generates alerts that notify security teams for further investigation.

### Log Retention and Storage

SIEM platforms also serve as centralized storage solutions for logs and event records. Organizations can retain data for different periods depending on compliance, legal, or operational requirements. This stored data can later support investigations, audits, or forensic analysis.

---

# The SIEM Workflow

The operation of a SIEM platform generally follows three important stages:

1. Collecting and aggregating data
2. Normalizing data
3. Analyzing data

These steps allow organizations to gather information from multiple sources, organize it into a usable format, and identify potential threats efficiently.

---

# Step 1: Collecting and Aggregating Data

SIEM tools rely heavily on data collection. During this phase, event logs are gathered from various sources such as:

* Firewalls
* Servers
* Routers
* Endpoints
* Applications

Logs contain useful details including:

* Timestamps
* IP addresses
* User activity
* Device information

Once collected, the logs are combined into a centralized system. This process is known as aggregation. Aggregation removes the need for analysts to manually review logs across multiple systems because all information becomes accessible through the SIEM platform.

## Parsing Data

During collection, SIEM tools may also perform parsing. Parsing extracts important information from raw log data and organizes it into readable fields.

### Example of a Raw Log

```text
April 3 11:01:21 server sshd[1088]: Failed password for user nuhara from 218.124.14.105 port 5023
```

### Example of Parsed Data

```text
host = server
process = sshd
source_user = nuhara
source_ip = 218.124.14.105
source_port = 5023
```

Parsing makes log information easier for analysts and SIEM systems to interpret.

---

# Step 2: Normalizing Data

Because logs come from different devices and software, they often use different formats. For example, firewall logs may look completely different from web server logs.

Normalization converts this data into a standardized structure that the SIEM can process efficiently. Standardized data improves:

* Searching
* Filtering
* Correlation
* Analysis

This step ensures that all event information follows a consistent format regardless of its source.

---

# Step 3: Analyzing Data

After logs are collected and normalized, the SIEM analyzes the information to detect suspicious activity. SIEM platforms use detection rules, conditions, and logic to identify patterns associated with threats or attacks.

If activity matches a detection rule, the system generates an alert for the security team.

## Correlation in SIEM

An important part of SIEM analysis is correlation. Correlation compares multiple log events from different systems to identify relationships or patterns that may indicate malicious activity.

For example, several failed login attempts followed by a successful login from the same IP address could indicate a brute-force attack.

---

# Common SIEM Platforms

Several SIEM solutions are widely used in the cybersecurity industry, including:

* AlienVault OSSIM
* Chronicle
* Elastic
* Exabeam
* IBM QRadar Security Intelligence Platform
* LogRhythm
* Splunk

These tools help organizations improve threat detection, incident response, and overall security monitoring.











# Cybersecurity Terms and Definitions

## Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT)

A dedicated team of cybersecurity professionals responsible for handling and responding to security incidents within an organization.

## Documentation

Recorded information or written material created and maintained for reference, operational, or investigative purposes.

## Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)

A security solution that monitors endpoint devices for suspicious or malicious behavior and helps respond to threats.

## Event

Any detectable activity or occurrence taking place on a network, system, or device.

## False Negative

A situation where a real threat or malicious activity exists but is not identified by the security system.

## False Positive

An alert generated incorrectly when legitimate activity is mistakenly identified as malicious.

## Incident

An event that threatens the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of systems or data, or violates security policies and procedures.

## Incident Handler’s Journal

A record used during incident response to document actions taken, observations, findings, and timelines.

## Incident Response Plan

A structured document that explains the steps and procedures to follow when responding to security incidents.

## Intrusion Detection System (IDS)

A monitoring tool that identifies suspicious or malicious activity and sends alerts when potential intrusions are detected.

## Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)

A security application that detects intrusive activity and automatically takes action to stop or block it.

## NIST Incident Response Lifecycle

A framework developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology that organizes incident response into four phases:

* Preparation
* Detection and Analysis
* Containment, Eradication, and Recovery
* Post-Incident Activity

## Playbook

A detailed guide containing step-by-step instructions for handling operational or security-related tasks.

## Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)

A platform that gathers, stores, and analyzes log data to monitor and investigate security events across an organization.

## Security Operations Center (SOC)

A centralized team or department responsible for continuously monitoring and defending systems, networks, and devices against cyber threats.

## Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response (SOAR)

A collection of integrated tools and automated workflows designed to improve and speed up incident response processes.

## True Negative

A condition where no malicious activity exists and the security system correctly produces no alert.

## True Positive

A correct alert generated when an actual attack or malicious activity is successfully detected.



























module 2

Network traffic - The amount of data that moves across a network.

Network data - The data that's transmitted between devices on a network.

Indicators of compromise (IOC) - Observable evidence that suggests signs of a potential security incident.

Data exfiltration - Unauthorized transmission of data from a system.














Network communication can often be noisy and complex. Everyday activities such as sending emails, streaming videos, or browsing websites all generate network activity in the form of traffic and transmitted data. Network traffic refers to the total volume of data moving across a network, and it may also describe the type of data being transferred, such as HTTP or other protocols. Network data, on the other hand, refers to the actual information that is exchanged between devices connected to a network.

Network monitoring plays a crucial role in maintaining awareness of what is happening across a network at any given time. By gathering and analyzing network traffic, organizations can identify unusual or suspicious behavior that may indicate a security issue. However, effective monitoring requires a clear understanding of what should be observed in the first place. In this section, you will explore why network monitoring is important, the methods used to monitor networks, and the tools that support this process.

Understanding your network

As previously learned, networks enable devices to connect and communicate by exchanging data through defined network protocols. These communications include useful details such as source and destination IP addresses, the amount of data being transferred, timestamps, and additional metadata. Security professionals use this information to build a baseline that represents normal or expected behavior within the network.

A baseline is a reference standard used for comparison purposes. You may already be familiar with similar concepts in daily life. For example, a monthly grocery budget can act as a baseline to track spending patterns and identify unexpected increases. In cybersecurity, baselines are used to define normal behavior for systems, devices, and networks. Once this normal pattern is established, it becomes much easier to recognize deviations that may indicate abnormal or suspicious activity.

Monitoring network activity

After establishing a baseline, the next step is to continuously monitor the network to detect any deviations from expected behavior. Monitoring involves examining different network components to identify unusual patterns, such as unexpectedly large data transfers or irregular communication behavior. Several key areas of a network can be observed for potential malicious activity:

Flow analysis

Flow refers to the movement of data across a network and includes details such as packets, ports, and communication protocols. Packets are transmitted to specific ports, which act as endpoints for sending and receiving data. These ports are usually linked to standard protocols. For instance, port 443 is typically associated with HTTPS, which is used to secure web traffic through encryption.

However, attackers may intentionally use unusual combinations of protocols and ports to avoid detection and maintain hidden communication channels between a compromised system and an external machine. This type of activity is commonly associated with command-and-control (C2) techniques, where attackers remotely manage infected systems. For example, using HTTPS traffic over an uncommon port such as 8088 instead of the standard 443 can be a sign of suspicious behavior. Organizations must therefore understand which ports and protocols are authorized and watch for any inconsistencies or mismatches.

Packet payload analysis

Network packets contain multiple components related to how data is transmitted, including source and destination IP addresses, as well as the payload. The payload represents the actual content being sent across the network. In many cases, this information is encrypted and must be decrypted before it can be fully analyzed. By examining packet payloads, organizations may detect abnormal activity, such as unauthorized transmission of sensitive information outside the network, which could indicate a data exfiltration attempt.

Temporal pattern analysis

Packets also carry time-related information, which helps in analyzing traffic patterns over specific periods. For example, an organization based in North America may typically observe heavy network activity between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., which forms part of its normal baseline. If unusually large traffic volumes occur outside of these expected working hours, this deviation from the baseline may signal suspicious activity that requires investigation.

By continuously monitoring these patterns, organizations can quickly identify potential intrusions and take action to secure their systems and network infrastructure.

Protecting the network

Throughout this program, you have learned about Security Operations Centers (SOC), which are responsible for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity threats. In addition to SOCs, organizations may also operate a Network Operations Center (NOC), which focuses on monitoring network performance and handling issues such as outages or service disruptions. While a SOC is primarily concerned with security monitoring and threat response, a NOC is responsible for ensuring network stability, performance, and availability.

Security analysts observe system and network activity across multiple monitoring screens to identify indicators of compromise (IoCs), which may suggest that a system has been breached or is under attack. To do this effectively, they must understand how normal network communication behaves so they can recognize deviations that may signal malicious activity.

Network monitoring tools

Network monitoring can be performed either manually or through automated systems, depending on the environment and requirements. Several commonly used tools include:

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)

Intrusion Detection Systems are designed to continuously monitor system and network activity and generate alerts when they detect behavior that matches known threat patterns or configured rules. IDS solutions often analyze packet contents, including payload data, to identify signatures associated with threats such as malware, phishing attempts, or other malicious activity.

Network protocol analyzers (packet sniffers)

Network protocol analyzers, also known as packet sniffers, are tools used to capture and inspect network traffic in detail. They allow security professionals to observe communications at a granular level and analyze how data flows across the network. Common examples include tools like tcpdump and Wireshark, which are used to capture packet data for further investigation. These packet captures can then be carefully examined to detect unusual behavior or evidence of potential security incidents.













Defensive measures:
1. Prevent attacker access
2. Monitor network activity
3. protect assets
4. Detect and stop the exfiltration 






Components of packet:
1. Header
2. Payload
3. Footer




Network protocol analyzer (packet sniffer) - A tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic within a network.



Packet capture (P-cap) - A file containing data packets intercepted from an interface or network.













Security analysts are responsible for observing and analyzing how data moves across a network. A common method for doing this is by creating packet captures and studying the collected traffic to spot unusual or suspicious behavior.

Earlier in the program, you built a foundation in networking concepts. In this section, that knowledge is used to better understand how network traffic flows. The focus here is on three key areas of network analysis: data packets, network protocol analyzers, and packet captures.

Packets

A data packet is the smallest unit of information that is transmitted between devices in a network. Identifying network intrusions often starts at this level because packets are the building blocks of all communication across networks.

Whenever you perform an online activity—such as opening a website or uploading a file—data is broken into multiple packets. These packets travel independently across the network and are then reassembled at the destination device to reconstruct the original data.

In cybersecurity investigations, packets provide essential details that help analysts understand what happened during an event. By studying packet behavior, analysts can detect irregularities and improve their ability to defend systems against attacks.

A packet is generally made up of three main parts: the header, the payload, and the footer.

Header

The header is the first section of a packet and contains critical routing information. Depending on the protocols in use, a packet may include multiple headers such as Ethernet, IP, or TCP headers.

These headers contain details like source and destination IP addresses, packet size, protocol type, and identification numbers. This information helps ensure the packet reaches the correct destination.

Payload

The payload is the section of the packet that carries the actual data being transmitted. For example, if an image is uploaded online, the image data itself is stored in the payload.

Footer

The footer (also called the trailer) appears at the end of certain packets, particularly Ethernet packets. It is mainly used for error detection and helps verify whether the data has been corrupted during transmission. However, many protocols, including IP, do not use a footer.

Network protocol analyzers

Network protocol analyzers, also known as packet sniffers, are tools used to capture and examine network traffic. Common examples include Wireshark, tcpdump, and TShark.

These tools are widely used in cybersecurity to investigate suspicious activity and monitor network behavior. They can also assist in performance analysis, such as measuring bandwidth usage or diagnosing slow network connections.

However, they can also be misused by attackers to intercept sensitive information, including login credentials or confidential data.

The diagram of a typical setup shows data moving between two systems, while a protocol analyzer captures packets as they travel through the network path.

How protocol analyzers function

Protocol analyzers rely on both software and hardware components to collect and display network traffic.

The process begins with the Network Interface Card (NIC), which allows a device to connect to a network. Normally, a NIC only processes traffic addressed to its own device. To capture all visible network traffic, it must be switched into a special mode.

In wired systems, this is often called promiscuous mode, while in wireless networks it is known as monitoring mode. This allows the NIC to observe more network traffic, though not necessarily the entire network. To capture full traffic, the analyzer must be placed at a strategic point in the network.

Once captured, packets are initially stored in binary form (0s and 1s), which is not human-readable. The protocol analyzer converts this data into a readable format so analysts can review and interpret it effectively.

Note that enabling promiscuous mode can introduce security risks, as it may expose sensitive information if misused. Therefore, it should always be used responsibly.

Packet captures

Packet sniffing refers to the process of capturing network traffic for analysis. A packet capture (often called a p-cap) is a file that stores recorded packets from a network interface.

These files can be opened and analyzed using tools like Wireshark or tcpdump. Analysts can filter packet data to focus on specific details, such as traffic from a particular IP address or unusual communication patterns.

It is important to note that capturing network traffic without authorization may be illegal in many regions.

Packet capture files can exist in different formats depending on the system or tool used:

Libpcap is commonly used on Unix-based systems such as Linux and macOS, and is supported by tools like tcpdump.
WinPcap is an older packet capture format used mainly on Windows systems.
Npcap is a modern Windows-compatible capture library developed for tools like Nmap.
PCAPng is an updated format that supports advanced features and can store additional metadata along with packet data.







Different protocols use different headers.



















Internet Protocol (IP) *** Important

Packets are the core unit of communication in any network, meaning that network investigation and detection often begin at the packet level. The Internet Protocol (IP) is a set of rules and standards responsible for addressing and routing these packets as they travel from one device to another across networks. IP serves as the fundamental layer that enables communication over the internet.

The primary role of IP is to ensure that packets successfully reach their intended destination. Today, two versions of IP are commonly used: IPv4 and IPv6. Each version uses a different header structure to organize packet information.

IPv4

IPv4 is the most widely used version of the Internet Protocol. Its header consists of 13 different fields, each serving a specific purpose in packet delivery and routing:

Version: Indicates the IP version being used (IPv4 in this case).
Internet Header Length (IHL): Specifies the size of the IPv4 header, including any optional fields.
Type of Service (ToS): Defines the priority level of the packet for delivery handling.
Total Length: Indicates the full size of the IP packet, including both header and data.
Identification: Assigns a unique value to packets that are fragmented so they can be correctly reassembled at the destination.
Flags: Provides information about fragmentation status, including whether fragmentation has occurred and if more fragments are expected.
Fragment Offset: Determines the correct order of fragmented packet pieces.
Time to Live (TTL): Limits the lifespan of a packet in the network to prevent it from circulating indefinitely.
Protocol: Identifies the protocol used in the data portion of the packet.
Header Checksum: Used for error detection in the header data.
Source Address: Specifies the IP address of the sender.
Destination Address: Specifies the IP address of the receiver.
Options: An optional field that can include additional settings, such as security-related configurations.

An IPv4 header contains these 13 structured fields that help ensure proper delivery and handling of packets.

IPv6

IPv6 is a newer version of the Internet Protocol and is increasingly being adopted due to its significantly larger address space. Unlike IPv4, its header is simpler and contains 8 fields:

Version: Identifies the protocol version (IPv6).
Traffic Class: Similar to IPv4’s Type of Service field, it defines the priority level of the packet.
Flow Label: Identifies packets belonging to the same communication flow, where a flow represents a sequence of packets from a single source.
Payload Length: Indicates the size of the data portion of the packet.
Next Header: Specifies the type of header that follows the IPv6 header, such as TCP.
Hop Limit: Functions similarly to TTL in IPv4, limiting how long a packet can remain in the network before being discarded.
Source Address: Contains the sender’s IP address.
Destination Address: Contains the receiver’s IP address.

An IPv6 header is more streamlined but still carries all essential routing and delivery information.

Header fields in both IPv4 and IPv6 are extremely valuable during investigations, and tools like Wireshark convert this raw data into a readable format for analysis.

Wireshark

Wireshark is an open-source network protocol analyzer that uses a graphical user interface (GUI). This makes it easier for security analysts to visually inspect and interpret network traffic. While Wireshark includes many advanced features, this section focuses on basic filtering techniques used to isolate relevant packets within large packet capture files.

Wireshark interface provides a structured view of captured network data, making it easier to investigate communication patterns.

Display filters in Wireshark

Wireshark display filters allow you to narrow down large packet capture files to only show the data relevant to your investigation. These filters can be applied based on protocols, IP addresses, ports, and many other packet attributes.

Comparison operators

Wireshark supports comparison operators that can be written either as symbols or abbreviations. For example:

Equal: == or eq
Not equal: != or ne
Greater than: > or gt
Less than: < or lt
Greater than or equal to: >= or ge
Less than or equal to: <= or le

For instance, the filter ip.src == 8.8.8.8 is equivalent to ip.src eq 8.8.8.8.

You can also combine these operators using Boolean logic such as and, or, and use parentheses to group conditions for more complex filtering.

Contains operator

The contains operator is used to find packets that include a specific string of text. For example, it can be used to display HTTP traffic that includes the word “moved” within the communication stream.

Matches operator

The matches operator allows filtering using regular expressions (regex). This enables pattern-based searching rather than exact matches. Regular expressions are sequences of characters used to define search patterns, and they are commonly used in advanced filtering scenarios.

Filter toolbar

Wireshark provides a filter toolbar where users can directly enter filter expressions. For example, typing dns will display only DNS-related packets, simplifying analysis of specific protocol traffic.

Wireshark also uses color coding to differentiate protocol types, and users can customize both filters and colors based on preference.

Filtering by protocol

One of the simplest filtering methods is by protocol name. By entering the protocol directly, Wireshark displays only relevant traffic. Common examples include:

dns
http
ftp
ssh
arp
telnet
icmp
Filtering by IP address

Wireshark allows filtering based on IP addresses in several ways:

ip.addr == 172.21.224.2 → filters traffic involving that IP address
ip.src == 10.10.10.10 → filters traffic originating from a specific source
ip.dst == 4.4.4.4 → filters traffic sent to a specific destination
Filtering by MAC address

You can also filter traffic using MAC (Media Access Control) addresses, which uniquely identify network devices. For example:

eth.addr == 00:70:f4:23:18:c4
Filtering by ports

Port-based filtering helps isolate traffic associated with specific services:

udp.port == 53 → filters UDP traffic on port 53 (commonly DNS)
tcp.port == 25 → filters TCP traffic on port 25 (commonly email services)
Following streams

Wireshark includes a “Follow Stream” feature that reconstructs full conversations between two devices. A stream represents a complete exchange of data using a specific protocol.

This feature allows analysts to view the full context of communication, such as HTTP request and response messages, in a readable format rather than individual packets. It is especially useful for understanding how a communication session unfolded from start to finish.
























Tcpdump (IMPORTANT)

As a security analyst, one of your responsibilities is to monitor network traffic and analyze communications moving across a network. Network protocol analyzers are important tools that help identify potential intrusions and investigate suspicious activity. Earlier, you learned the following concepts:

A network protocol analyzer (also called a packet sniffer) is a tool used to capture and inspect network traffic.
Packet sniffing is the process of collecting and examining data packets as they travel through a network.

In this section, you'll take a closer look at tcpdump, a popular network protocol analyzer that allows analysts to capture, inspect, and analyze network communications.

What is tcpdump?

Tcpdump is a command-line network protocol analyzer. A command-line interface (CLI) is a text-based environment where users interact with a system by entering commands instead of using graphical elements.

Tcpdump is primarily used to capture network traffic and analyze the packets being transmitted across a network. Captured traffic can be stored in a packet capture (p-cap) file, which contains intercepted packet data from a network interface. These files can be reviewed immediately, shared with others, or saved for future analysis.

Security professionals use tcpdump for many purposes, including troubleshooting network problems, monitoring traffic patterns, and investigating potentially malicious activity. Tcpdump is included by default in many Linux distributions and can also be installed on other Unix-like operating systems, including macOS.

Note: Much of today's network traffic is encrypted, meaning its contents are encoded and unreadable without proper decryption. Analyzing encrypted packets may require access to the corresponding private keys.

Capturing packets with tcpdump

As discussed previously, Linux systems have a root user (superuser) with elevated permissions. The sudo command temporarily grants these elevated privileges to authorized users.

Because packet capturing requires access to low-level network resources, tcpdump generally must be run with administrator privileges. This means you must either log in as the root user or execute commands using sudo.

The general syntax for capturing packets with tcpdump is:

sudo tcpdump [-i interface] [option(s)] [expression(s)]
Command components

sudo tcpdump

Starts tcpdump with elevated privileges required for packet capturing.

-i interface

Specifies the network interface that tcpdump should monitor. Packet capture cannot begin until an interface is selected.

For example:

sudo tcpdump -i any

The value any instructs tcpdump to listen on all available network interfaces.

option(s)

Options (or flags) modify the behavior of tcpdump and control how packet data is captured or displayed.

expression(s)

Expressions act as filters that help isolate specific traffic of interest. These filters allow analysts to focus on relevant packets during investigations.

Note: Before capturing traffic, it is important to identify available network interfaces. The -D option can be used to display all interfaces on the system.

Tcpdump options

Tcpdump supports numerous options (also called flags) that customize packet capturing and analysis. Short options use a single dash followed by a character, while long options use two dashes followed by the full option name.

Examples:

-i

or

--interface

Tcpdump provides more than fifty available options. The following are among the most commonly used.

The -w option

The -w flag writes captured traffic directly to a packet capture file instead of displaying it on screen.

Example:

sudo tcpdump -i any -w packetcapture.pcap

This command captures traffic from all interfaces and stores it in a file named packetcapture.pcap.

Saving captures is useful because the data can be analyzed later using tcpdump, Wireshark, or other packet analysis tools.

The -r option

The -r flag reads an existing packet capture file.

Example:

sudo tcpdump -r packetcapture.pcap

This command opens and displays packet information from the specified capture file.

The -v option

Packets contain a large amount of information. By default, tcpdump displays only a limited summary.

The verbose option (-v) increases the amount of detail shown.

Tcpdump supports three verbosity levels:

-v
-vv
-vvv

Each additional v increases the level of detail displayed.

Example:

sudo tcpdump -r packetcapture.pcap -v

This command reads the capture file and displays more detailed packet information, including additional header details.

The -c option

The -c flag stands for count and controls how many packets tcpdump captures before stopping.

Examples:

-c 1

Captures one packet.

-c 10

Captures ten packets.

Example command:

sudo tcpdump -i any -c 3

This tells tcpdump to capture only the first three packets observed on all interfaces.

The -n option

By default, tcpdump performs name resolution, converting IP addresses and port numbers into hostnames and service names.

For example:

An IP address may be translated into a domain name.
Port 80 may automatically be displayed as HTTP.

Although convenient, this behavior can sometimes produce misleading results because a port is not always associated with its typical service.

Additionally, name resolution requires reverse DNS lookups. A reverse DNS lookup attempts to identify the hostname associated with an IP address. In some investigations, this could alert an attacker that their infrastructure is being examined.

Using the -n option disables hostname resolution.

Example:

sudo tcpdump -r packetcapture.pcap -v -n

This command reads the capture file, displays verbose information, and prevents hostname lookups.

Using:

-nn

disables both hostname resolution and service-name resolution for ports.

Many analysts consider -n or -nn a best practice during packet analysis.

Pro Tip

Multiple options can often be combined.

For example:

-vn

is equivalent to:

-v -n

However, options that require their own values (such as -c 5 or -r file.pcap) generally cannot be merged with other flags.

Filter expressions

Filter expressions are optional but extremely useful when analyzing large amounts of traffic.

Instead of viewing every packet, expressions allow analysts to focus on specific protocols, IP addresses, ports, or communication types.

For example, to display only IPv6 traffic:

ip6

Tcpdump also supports Boolean operators such as:

and
or
not

These operators can be combined to create more precise filters.

Example:

sudo tcpdump -r packetcapture.pcap -n 'ip and port 80'

This command displays only IPv4 traffic that uses port 80.

Pro Tip

Filter expressions can be enclosed in single or double quotation marks.

Parentheses can also be used to group conditions and define precedence.

Example:

ip and (port 80 or port 443)

This filter first evaluates traffic using ports 80 or 443 and then limits results to IPv4 packets.

Grouping conditions becomes especially valuable when building more complex search criteria.

Understanding tcpdump output

When tcpdump captures packets, it displays one line of output for each packet observed. Every line begins with a timestamp followed by information about the communication.

Consider the following command:

sudo tcpdump -i any -v -c 1

This command:

Captures traffic from all interfaces (-i any)
Displays detailed packet information (-v)
Stops after capturing one packet (-c 1)

The output typically contains the following components:

Timestamp

Each packet begins with a timestamp showing:

Hours
Minutes
Seconds
Fractions of a second

This indicates exactly when the packet was captured.

Source IP Address

The source IP identifies the system that sent the packet.

Source Port

The source port indicates the application or service from which the packet originated.

Destination IP Address

The destination IP identifies the system receiving the packet.

Destination Port

The destination port identifies the service or application to which the packet is being sent.

Additional Packet Details

The remaining output may include:

TCP flags
Sequence numbers
Acknowledgment values
Window sizes
Header information
Other protocol-specific details

When the -v option is used, tcpdump provides even more information about packet headers and communication characteristics, helping analysts better understand network activity and investigate potential security events.





















Command and Control (C2): Methods and communication channels used by attackers to remotely manage and maintain access to compromised systems.
Command-Line Interface (CLI): A text-based environment where users interact with a computer by entering commands instead of using graphical elements.
Data Exfiltration: The unauthorized extraction, transfer, or removal of sensitive information from a system or network.
Data Packet: The smallest unit of data transmitted across a network between devices.
Indicators of Compromise (IoC): Detectable signs or evidence that may indicate a system has been compromised or is experiencing a security incident.
Internet Protocol (IP): A communication protocol that provides addressing and routing mechanisms to deliver packets across networks.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS): A security tool that continuously monitors network or system activity and generates alerts when suspicious behavior is detected.
Media Access Control (MAC) Address: A unique hardware identifier assigned to a network-enabled device for communication within a local network.
NIST Incident Response Lifecycle: A structured incident response framework developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, consisting of four stages: Preparation, Detection and Analysis, Containment/Eradication/Recovery, and Post-Incident Activities.
Network Data: The actual information exchanged between devices over a network connection.
Network Protocol Analyzer (Packet Sniffer): A tool that captures, examines, and analyzes network traffic for monitoring, troubleshooting, and security purposes.
Network Traffic: The flow and volume of data transmitted across a network during communication between devices.
Network Interface Card (NIC): A hardware component that enables a device to connect and communicate over a network.
Packet Capture (P-CAP): A file containing recorded network packets collected from a network interface for later analysis.
Packet Sniffing: The process of intercepting, collecting, and examining network packets traveling across a network.
Playbook: A documented set of procedures and instructions that guides operational or incident response activities.
Root User (Superuser): A privileged account with unrestricted access and authority to make system-wide changes.
Sudo: A Linux command that allows authorized users to temporarily execute commands with elevated administrative privileges.
tcpdump: A command-line utility used to capture, inspect, and analyze network packets and traffic.
Wireshark: A graphical, open-source network protocol analyzer used to capture and investigate network communications in detail.



















module 3



Detection - The prompt discovery of security events


Analysis - The investigation and validation of alerts



Challenges in the detection and analysis phase:
Impossible to detect everything
High volumes of alerts















Security analysts rely on detection technologies to uncover potential threats, but there are also other approaches that support identifying malicious activity.

Earlier, you learned how security tools can recognize attacks such as data exfiltration. In this reading, you’ll explore additional detection approaches organizations can use to identify security threats.

Methods of detection

During the Detection and Analysis stage of the incident response lifecycle, security teams receive alerts about possible security incidents and then investigate them by gathering and examining relevant data. In simple terms, detection is about quickly identifying security events, while analysis focuses on confirming and understanding those alerts.

As discussed earlier, an intrusion detection system (IDS) can spot suspicious behavior and generate alerts for analysts to review. Similarly, security information and event management (SIEM) systems help collect, correlate, and analyze security logs to support detection efforts.

However, detection is not perfect. Even strong security teams can miss real attacks for several reasons. Detection tools only work based on what they are configured to monitor, so incorrect or incomplete configuration can allow malicious activity to go unnoticed. Because of this, organizations often combine multiple detection approaches to improve accuracy and coverage.

Threat hunting

Modern attackers constantly change their techniques, making it difficult for automated systems to keep up. Human-led approaches such as threat hunting help bridge this gap by combining analyst expertise with security tools to uncover hidden threats.

Threat hunting is a proactive process where security professionals actively search for malicious activity within a network instead of waiting for alerts. It is also used to investigate suspicious behavior in more depth and identify threats before they cause serious harm. For example, fileless malware is especially hard to detect because it operates in system memory instead of relying on files, helping it evade traditional signature-based detection. Threat hunting helps uncover such stealthy threats through manual investigation supported by tools.

Note: Individuals who perform threat hunting are called threat hunters. They study emerging attack methods and evaluate how likely an organization is to be targeted. Their work often uses threat intelligence, indicators of compromise (IOCs), indicators of attack (IOAs), and machine learning techniques to locate hidden threats.

Threat intelligence

Organizations can strengthen detection by staying informed about current and emerging threats and understanding how attackers may target their systems. This is done using threat intelligence, which refers to analyzed, evidence-based information about potential or active threats.

Threat intelligence is gathered from several sources, including:

Industry research reports: These describe attacker behavior, including tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs).
Government alerts: These also provide insights into attacker methods and TTPs.
Threat feeds: These continuously deliver data such as suspicious IP addresses, domains, and file hashes, which may be linked to advanced persistent threats (APTs), where attackers maintain long-term unauthorized access to systems.

Managing large amounts of this information can be difficult, so organizations often use a threat intelligence platform (TIP). A TIP collects, organizes, and analyzes threat data from multiple sources, helping security teams prioritize risks and improve defenses.

Note: Threat feeds should support detection by adding context, not be used as the sole basis for creating detection rules.

Cyber deception

Cyber deception techniques are designed to intentionally mislead attackers in order to detect them and strengthen defensive capabilities.

One common example is a honeypot, which is a deliberately exposed decoy system meant to attract attackers. For instance, a fake file named Client Credit Card Information - 2022 can be used to lure malicious users. When an attacker interacts with it, security teams receive alerts, allowing them to observe behavior and respond accordingly.


















Ongoing CI/CD Monitoring: Automated Threat Detection

In the previous discussion on incident detection techniques, you explored methods used to identify cybersecurity threats, including tools such as intrusion detection systems (IDS) and security information and event management (SIEM) platforms. This section focuses on continuous monitoring within Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery/Deployment (CI/CD) environments. Monitoring CI/CD pipelines plays an important role in securing the software supply chain by automatically identifying suspicious activity and highlighting potential Indicators of Compromise (IoCs).

Automated Threat Detection in CI/CD

CI/CD pipelines enable faster software development and deployment, but they can also become targets for attackers. If a pipeline is compromised, malicious actors may inject harmful code, access sensitive information, or disrupt software delivery processes.

Continuous monitoring is therefore essential. Modern monitoring solutions do more than gather logs; they automatically analyze build activities, source code changes, and deployment operations to identify unusual behavior that may indicate security threats. Once suspicious activity is detected, security teams can investigate and respond quickly, reducing potential damage. Automated threat detection is a key component of effective CI/CD security.

Common Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) in CI/CD Pipelines

Recognizing common IoCs helps organizations identify and respond to security incidents more effectively.

Unauthorized Code Modifications
Code commits performed by unauthorized users.
Source code changes originating from unusual locations or occurring at unexpected times.
Suspicious code patterns, such as heavily obfuscated code, large unexplained deletions, or code that violates established development standards.
Abnormal Deployment Activity
Deployments targeting unauthorized or unexpected environments.
Releases occurring outside approved deployment windows.
Production deployments initiated by unauthorized users or service accounts.
Compromised Dependencies
Detection of known vulnerabilities (CVEs) during automated dependency scanning.
Sudden introduction of unfamiliar dependencies into build configurations.
Attempts to retrieve packages from unofficial or untrusted repositories.
Irregular Pipeline Behavior
Previously stable pipeline stages unexpectedly failing.
Significant increases in build or deployment execution times.
Unauthorized modifications to pipeline workflows or execution sequences.
Attempts to Access Secrets
Evidence of unauthorized access attempts to credentials, API keys, or other secrets.
Discovery of hardcoded secrets within source code commits.
Strengthening Security Through IoC Monitoring

Continuous monitoring focused on anomaly detection and IoC identification allows organizations to take a proactive security approach. By continuously analyzing pipeline activities before attackers can cause significant harm, organizations can:

Accelerate Incident Response

Early detection enables security teams to investigate and contain threats before attackers achieve their objectives.

Reduce Potential Impact

Rapid identification and remediation limit the time attackers can remain active within the pipeline, reducing overall damage.

Improve Threat Intelligence

Analyzing IoCs provides insights into attacker techniques and behaviors, helping organizations strengthen future security measures and threat-hunting efforts.

Techniques for Automated Anomaly and IoC Detection
Comprehensive Logging and Auditing

Detailed logging forms the foundation of effective monitoring. Logs provide the data required for identifying anomalies and potential IoCs.

Pipeline Execution Logs

Monitoring tools establish a baseline of normal pipeline behavior by analyzing successful pipeline runs. This baseline includes:

Expected execution times for each stage.
Normal success and failure rates.
Standard workflow sequences.

Any deviations, such as unusually long execution times, unexpected failures, or changes in stage order, may indicate suspicious activity and should be investigated.

Code Commit Logs

Tracking source code changes helps identify unusual behavior, including:

Commits from unauthorized contributors.
Changes made during unusual hours.
Suspicious modifications involving obfuscation or extensive deletions.
Access Logs

Monitoring access patterns can reveal:

Logins from unfamiliar geographic locations.
Multiple failed authentication attempts followed by a successful login.
Attempts to modify critical CI/CD configurations.

These events may indicate account compromise or unauthorized access.

Deployment Logs

Deployment monitoring helps establish normal release patterns. Potential IoCs include:

Deployments occurring at unexpected times.
Releases to unauthorized environments.
Unusual deployment frequencies.
SIEM Integration for CI/CD Monitoring

Integrating CI/CD logs with a SIEM platform enhances large-scale threat detection capabilities.

SIEM solutions can:

Automatically Detect Anomalies

Using analytics and machine learning, SIEMs identify unusual patterns across pipeline activities that may indicate compromise.

Generate Alerts for Known IoCs

Custom detection rules can trigger alerts when:

Known malicious file hashes are detected in build artifacts.
CI/CD infrastructure communicates with known command-and-control (C2) servers.
Unauthorized attempts are made to access sensitive credentials or secrets.
Real-Time Alerting and Notifications

Automated notifications ensure that security teams are informed immediately when suspicious activity occurs.

Alerts should be configured for:

Repeated Build Failures

Unexpected failures occurring after seemingly harmless code changes may indicate malicious activity.

Suspicious Code Changes

Code analysis tools can identify unusual commits based on factors such as size, author behavior, or suspicious coding techniques.

Secret Access Attempts

Security controls should generate alerts whenever unauthorized attempts are made to retrieve sensitive credentials or tokens.

Unusual Network Activity

Unexpected outbound traffic from CI/CD systems, particularly communications with unknown or suspicious destinations, should be investigated.

Performance Monitoring and Indicators of Attack (IoAs)

Although performance monitoring primarily focuses on system reliability, it can also assist in identifying Indicators of Attack (IoAs).

Examples include:

Sudden performance degradation.
Unusual resource consumption.
Unexpected increases in CPU, memory, or network utilization.

These warning signs may warrant further investigation and can ultimately lead to the discovery of IoCs.

Continuous Vulnerability Scanning

Regular vulnerability assessments help identify weaknesses before attackers can exploit them.

Scanning should include:

CI/CD platforms and services.
Plugins and extensions.
Containers and container images.
Supporting infrastructure components.

Identifying Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) allows organizations to prioritize remediation efforts and reduce the risk of pipeline compromise.





















Understanding the Pyramid of Pain and Indicators of Compromise

This reading introduces the concept of the Pyramid of Pain, a framework that helps security teams understand the effectiveness of different indicators used to detect malicious activity. By understanding how attackers react when these indicators are blocked, organizations can strengthen their defenses and reduce the impact of security incidents.

Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)

Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) are pieces of observable evidence that suggest a security breach or malicious activity may have occurred. They provide clues that an attack has taken place and help investigators identify what happened.

Examples of IoCs include:

A malicious file name
A suspicious IP address
A known malware hash value
An unauthorized domain connection

An IoC can be compared to discovering signs of a completed crime, such as noticing that valuables have been stolen from a vehicle. The evidence points to an event that has already happened.

Indicators of Attack (IoAs)

Indicators of Attack (IoAs) focus on identifying attacker behavior while an attack is occurring. Rather than highlighting evidence left behind, IoAs reveal suspicious actions and patterns that indicate malicious intent.

IoAs help security teams understand:

How an attack is being carried out
Why the attacker is performing certain actions
What techniques are being used

For example:

A process establishing an unexpected network connection is an IoA.
The process name and destination IP address associated with that connection are IoCs.

In simple terms:

Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)	Indicators of Attack (IoAs)
Show evidence of a completed or existing compromise	Show attacker behavior during an attack
Focus on "who" and "what"	Focus on "how" and "why"
Often discovered after an event	Often detected during an event

Note: An IoC alone does not always confirm a security incident. Similar indicators may result from user mistakes, software errors, or system issues unrelated to malicious activity.

The Pyramid of Pain

Not all indicators provide the same level of value to defenders. Some indicators are easy for attackers to change, while others require significant effort to modify.

To illustrate this concept, security researcher David J. Bianco developed the Pyramid of Pain.

The Pyramid of Pain demonstrates how difficult it becomes for attackers to continue their operations when different types of indicators are detected and blocked. As defenders move higher up the pyramid, attackers experience greater disruption and must invest more effort to evade detection.

The lower levels cause minimal inconvenience, while the upper levels can significantly impact an attacker's ability to operate.

Levels of the Pyramid of Pain
1. Hash Values (Least Painful)

Hash values are unique identifiers generated from files.

Examples:

Malware file hashes
Hashes of malicious documents
Hashes linked to compromised files

Security teams often use hash values to identify known malicious files quickly.

Attacker Difficulty: Low

Attackers can simply modify a file slightly to generate a completely different hash value.

2. IP Addresses

An IP address identifies a device on a network.

Example:

192.168.1.1

Blocking malicious IP addresses can prevent communication with known attacker infrastructure.

Attacker Difficulty: Low

Attackers can easily switch to different IP addresses, cloud resources, or proxy services.

3. Domain Names

Domain names are human-readable web addresses.

Examples:

example.com
malicious-domain.net

Security teams often block domains associated with phishing campaigns or malware distribution.

Attacker Difficulty: Moderate

Registering a new domain is relatively inexpensive and straightforward for attackers.

4. Network Artifacts

Network artifacts are traces of malicious activity that appear within network traffic.

Examples include:

Suspicious User-Agent strings
Unusual HTTP headers
Abnormal protocol behavior
Distinct communication patterns

These artifacts often reveal attacker techniques rather than specific infrastructure.

Attacker Difficulty: Moderate to High

Changing network behavior usually requires modifications to malware or attack tools.

5. Host Artifacts

Host artifacts are traces left behind on systems targeted by attackers.

Examples:

Malware-created files
Registry modifications
Scheduled tasks
Persistence mechanisms

These indicators often reveal how malware operates on a compromised device.

Attacker Difficulty: High

Attackers must redesign portions of their malware or attack process to avoid detection.

6. Tools

Tools are the software applications or utilities attackers use to achieve their objectives.

Examples:

Password-cracking programs
Remote access tools
Malware frameworks
Exploitation utilities

A common example is the password-cracking tool John the Ripper.

Attacker Difficulty: Very High

Replacing or modifying tools requires time, expertise, and additional resources.

7. Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) (Most Painful)

At the top of the pyramid are Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs).

Tactics describe an attacker's overall objective.
Techniques explain how the objective is achieved.
Procedures provide the detailed steps used during execution.

Examples:

Credential dumping
Lateral movement
Privilege escalation
Phishing campaigns
Persistence techniques

TTPs represent attacker behavior rather than specific artifacts.

Attacker Difficulty: Extremely High

When defenders detect and block TTPs, attackers may need to redesign significant portions of their operations, making it much harder to continue their attacks successfully.

























Investigative Tools and Adding Context to Security Incidents

In previous lessons, you explored various detection methods used to identify security incidents. This reading focuses on how investigative tools help security analysts examine suspicious Indicators of Compromise (IoCs) and gather additional context around alerts. Remember, an IoC is any observable piece of evidence that may indicate a potential security incident.

Why Context Matters in Investigations

The Pyramid of Pain demonstrates that different IoCs provide different levels of value during threat detection. While IoCs help identify suspicious activity, relying on a single indicator often provides only a limited view of an attack.

For example, blocking a malicious IP address may stop one aspect of an attack, but it does not reveal the attacker's overall objectives, methods, or related activities. Attackers can often switch to a different IP address and continue their operations.

Focusing on a single IoC is similar to examining only one small section of a large picture—you may miss important details needed to understand the entire situation.

To gain a more complete understanding, security analysts use threat intelligence, which is evidence-based information about current or emerging threats. Threat intelligence provides additional context around IoCs and helps analysts connect related artifacts, activities, and behaviors.

For instance, a suspicious IP address may be linked to:

Unusual network communications
Malicious domains
Suspicious files
Abnormal system processes

By connecting these indicators, security teams can build a clearer picture of the incident, understand its scope, and make better-informed response decisions.

The Role of Crowdsourcing in Threat Intelligence

Crowdsourcing is the process of collecting information through contributions from a large group of people or organizations.

In cybersecurity, crowdsourcing allows organizations to share threat intelligence with the broader security community. Traditionally, security incidents were investigated in isolation, with each organization handling attacks independently. As a result, attackers could reuse the same techniques against multiple targets.

Today, organizations benefit from shared knowledge contributed by:

Security researchers
Technology vendors
Government agencies
Cloud service providers
Security operations teams

This collaborative approach helps improve detection methods and defensive technologies across the industry.

Information Sharing Organizations

Several organizations exist specifically to facilitate threat intelligence sharing.

Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)

Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) collect and distribute industry-specific threat intelligence.

Examples include sectors such as:

Healthcare
Energy
Finance
Transportation

Organizations within the same industry can use this intelligence to better defend against sector-specific threats.

Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT)

Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) involves collecting and analyzing information from publicly available sources.

OSINT can be used to gather intelligence about:

Threat actors
Attack campaigns
Vulnerabilities
Infrastructure used by attackers

Security teams frequently use OSINT to enrich investigations and improve situational awareness.

How Shared Threat Intelligence Improves Security

Threat intelligence collected through crowdsourcing helps strengthen security products and detection systems.

Attackers often reuse the same infrastructure, malware, domains, and techniques across multiple organizations. Once one organization identifies and reports malicious activity, that information can help others defend against the same threat.

For example, when a malicious file, IP address, or URL is discovered, it can be shared with the security community. Detection tools and antivirus products can then use this information to identify and block the threat before it impacts additional organizations.

This collaborative model significantly improves collective defense capabilities.

VirusTotal

One of the most widely used threat intelligence platforms is VirusTotal.

VirusTotal is a free service that allows users to analyze suspicious:

Files
URLs
Domains
IP addresses

The platform aggregates results from numerous security vendors and provides detailed information about submitted artifacts.

Users can submit an IoC and receive a report showing:

Whether the artifact is considered malicious
Related indicators and infrastructure
Behavioral analysis results
Community feedback
Understanding VirusTotal Reports
Detection

The Detection section displays verdicts from multiple security vendors.

Possible classifications include:

Malicious
Suspicious
Unsafe
Clean

This allows analysts to quickly determine how widely an artifact is recognized as a threat.

Details

The Details section contains technical information gathered through static analysis.

Examples include:

File hashes
File type
File size
Metadata
Creation timestamps
Submission history

This information helps analysts better understand the artifact.

Relations

The Relations section shows connections between the analyzed artifact and other IoCs.

Examples include:

Related domains
Connected IP addresses
Contacted URLs
Dropped files

These relationships help investigators identify additional indicators associated with an attack.

Behavior

The Behavior section contains results from executing the artifact in a controlled sandbox environment.

This information may include:

Network communications
File system activity
Registry changes
Process creation
Detected attacker techniques

Behavioral analysis provides valuable insight into how an artifact operates.

Community

The Community section contains comments and observations from security professionals and researchers.

Community contributions often provide useful context, threat intelligence, and investigative findings.

Vendor Ratio and Community Score

At the top of a VirusTotal report, two important metrics are displayed:

Vendor Ratio: The number of security vendors that classify the artifact as malicious.
Community Score: A reputation score generated from community feedback.

Generally, a higher vendor ratio and community score increase confidence that the artifact is malicious.

Important: Files uploaded to VirusTotal become accessible to the wider VirusTotal community. Sensitive, confidential, or personal information should never be uploaded.

Additional Investigation Tools

Several other platforms can help analysts investigate suspicious artifacts and gather threat intelligence.

Jotti's Malware Scan

Jotti's Malware Scan is a free service that scans suspicious files using multiple antivirus engines.

Features:

Multi-engine malware scanning
Simple file submission process
Limited submission capacity
urlscan.io

urlscan.io analyzes URLs and websites, providing detailed information about their behavior and content.

Capabilities include:

Website analysis
Domain information
Network requests
Security observations

It is particularly useful for investigating phishing websites and suspicious URLs.

MalwareBazaar

MalwareBazaar is a public repository that stores malware samples for research and analysis purposes.

Security professionals use it to:

Study malware behavior
Collect threat intelligence
Support incident investigations
Improve detection capabilities


















Benefits of documentation:
Transparency
Standardization
Clarity




Chain of custody - The process of documenting evidence possession and control during an incident lifecycle


Broken chain of custody - Inconsistencies in the collection and logging of evidence in the chain of custody.




Chain of custody establishes:
Integrity
Reliability
Accuracy




The Role of Documentation in Cybersecurity

Documentation refers to any recorded information created for a specific purpose, and it plays a vital role in cybersecurity operations. Security teams rely on documentation to support investigations, guide daily tasks, and communicate findings clearly across the organization.

This section explores the key benefits of documentation and outlines best practices for creating effective and reliable security documentation.

Benefits of Documentation

Effective security documentation provides three main advantages:

Transparency

Transparency is essential in cybersecurity, especially for compliance, audits, insurance requirements, and legal processes. Proper documentation ensures that every action taken during an incident can be traced and verified.

A key example is the chain of custody, which is the process of recording the handling, transfer, and control of evidence throughout an incident investigation. This creates a clear audit trail and ensures accountability at every stage.

Standardization

Standardization refers to the use of consistent procedures and structured processes across security operations. It helps organizations improve efficiency, support knowledge sharing, and simplify onboarding for new team members.

Organizations often rely on security frameworks such as those developed by NIST to guide best practices.

A common example of standardized documentation is an incident response plan. This document outlines predefined steps for handling security incidents, ensuring that teams follow consistent procedures during investigations and response efforts. Standardization ensures that responses are repeatable, organized, and aligned with organizational goals.

Clarity

Clear documentation ensures that information is easy to understand and actionable for its intended audience. In cybersecurity, analysts must clearly explain the reasoning behind decisions such as escalating or closing alerts.

Well-structured documentation allows team members to quickly access relevant information and take appropriate action without confusion or delay.

Best Practices for Effective Security Documentation

To create strong and useful documentation in cybersecurity, professionals should follow these key practices:

1. Understand Your Audience

Before writing any document, it is important to identify who will read it and what level of detail they require.

For example:

A SOC analyst or security manager expects technical details and structured analysis.
A CEO or executive audience requires high-level summaries without technical jargon.

Tailoring documentation to the audience ensures better understanding and usability.

2. Keep It Concise

Documentation should be clear and focused. Overly long or complex documents may discourage people from reading or using them effectively.

The purpose of the document should be stated early, often in an executive summary. This helps readers quickly understand the key points and relevance of the information.

Concise writing improves accessibility and ensures important details are not overlooked.

3. Maintain Regular Updates

Cybersecurity environments change rapidly due to new vulnerabilities, threats, and attack techniques. As a result, documentation must be continuously reviewed and updated.

After an incident is resolved, teams should conduct post-incident reviews to identify gaps in processes or improvements needed in procedures. Updating documentation ensures that security practices remain effective and aligned with current threats.













Playbooks:
Non-automated
automated
semi-automated





Triage - The prioritizing of incidents according to their level of importance or urgency.



Triage process:
1. Receive and assess
2. Assign priority
3. Collect and analyze



Questions to ask:
Is there anything out of the ordinary?
Are there multiple failed login attempts?
Did the login happen outside of normal working hours?
Did the login happen outside of the network?













Understanding the Security Triage Process

Previously, you learned that triage is used in cybersecurity to evaluate alerts and assign them a level of priority. In this section, you will explore how the triage process works and why it is important for security operations. As a security analyst, triaging alerts efficiently helps ensure that critical threats are handled quickly and effectively.

What is Triage?

Triage is the process of categorizing security incidents based on their urgency and importance. Since organizations may receive large volumes of alerts, triage helps security teams decide which issues need immediate attention and which can be handled later.

This ensures that limited time and resources are focused on the most serious threats first.

Steps in the Triage Process

The triage process typically includes three main stages:

1. Receive and Assess

In this step, a security analyst receives an alert from a monitoring system such as an intrusion detection system (IDS), which tracks network or system activity and generates alerts for suspicious behavior.

The analyst then evaluates the alert to understand its context and determine whether it represents a real security concern.

Key evaluation questions include:

Is this a false positive, or a legitimate threat?
Has this alert occurred before, and how was it handled previously?
Is the alert linked to a known vulnerability or exploit?
How severe is the alert in terms of potential impact?

This stage is focused on gathering initial information and confirming whether the alert requires further investigation.

2. Assign Priority

Once an alert is confirmed as valid, it must be prioritized based on its potential impact. Not all incidents affect systems or organizations equally, so prioritization helps ensure that the most critical issues are addressed first.

Key factors used to determine priority include:

Functional Impact

This refers to how the incident affects the operation of systems and services. For example, a ransomware attack may disrupt access to systems by encrypting or deleting data, severely affecting availability and functionality.

Information Impact

This focuses on how the incident affects data confidentiality, integrity, and availability. For instance, data theft can expose sensitive personal or organizational information and impact third parties as well.

Recoverability

This considers how easily an organization can recover from the incident. Some incidents may be reversible, while others—such as leaked proprietary data—may be impossible to fully recover from. The effort and resources required for recovery also influence priority decisions.

Many security alerts already include a severity rating, which helps guide prioritization.

3. Collect and Analyze

In this final stage, the analyst gathers detailed evidence from multiple sources and performs in-depth analysis to better understand the incident.

This may involve:

Reviewing system and network logs
Conducting external threat research
Correlating related alerts and events
Documenting findings and actions taken

The goal is to build enough context to make an informed decision about the incident. Depending on its severity, the alert may be escalated to a more experienced analyst or a security manager for further handling.

Benefits of the Triage Process

Effective triage provides several important advantages for security teams:

Efficient Resource Allocation

Triage ensures that analysts focus their time and effort on high-priority threats instead of spending excessive time on low-risk alerts. This improves response efficiency and reduces delays in handling critical incidents.

Consistent and Standardized Response

Triage follows structured procedures, often supported by documentation such as incident response playbooks. This ensures that alerts are handled consistently, validated properly, and escalated only when necessary.
















Containment - The act of limiting and preventing additional damage caused by an incident.

Eradication - The complete removal of the incident elements from all affected systems.

Recovery - The process of returning affected systems back to normal operations.







Business Continuity Planning (BCP)

Security teams must be ready to reduce the impact that security incidents can have on normal business operations. When disruptions occur, organizations may face serious interruptions to their systems and services. If these disruptions last for long periods, they can lead to financial loss, legal issues, and damage to reputation.

To handle this, organizations use business continuity planning to ensure they can continue operating even during major incidents.

What is a Business Continuity Plan?

A Business Continuity Plan (BCP) is a documented strategy that defines how an organization will maintain essential operations during and after a significant disruption.

Its main purpose is to ensure that critical business functions can either continue without interruption or be restored quickly after an incident.

While entry-level security analysts are usually not responsible for creating or testing BCPs, understanding them is important because they play a key role in incident response and recovery.

BCP vs Disaster Recovery Plan

A Business Continuity Plan (BCP) is not the same as a disaster recovery plan.

BCP: Focuses on keeping business operations running during and after a disruption.
Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP): Focuses specifically on restoring IT systems and data after a major failure or disaster (such as hardware failure or natural events like floods).

Both work together but serve different purposes.

Impact of Security Incidents on Business Continuity

Security incidents such as ransomware attacks can severely disrupt business operations. In critical sectors like healthcare, the impact can be especially serious.

For example, ransomware may encrypt important systems and block access to medical records. This can prevent healthcare providers from delivering timely treatment and disrupt essential services.

At a larger scale, attacks on critical infrastructure can affect:

Public safety
National security
Economic stability
Essential services

Because of these risks, business continuity planning is essential to ensure that important services remain available even during attacks.

Recovery Strategies in Business Continuity

To restore operations after a disruption, organizations use recovery strategies defined in their BCP. These strategies help systems return to normal functioning as quickly as possible.

One important area of recovery is site resilience, which focuses on ensuring that infrastructure such as data centers and networks remain available during failures or attacks.

Site Resilience and Recovery Sites

Site resilience refers to an organization’s ability to prepare for, respond to, and recover from disruptions while continuing operations.

To support this, organizations use different types of backup sites:

Hot Sites

A hot site is a fully operational backup environment that mirrors the primary system.

Ready for immediate use
Fully synchronized with primary infrastructure
Activated instantly during a failure
Warm Sites

A warm site is partially prepared and contains updated systems and configurations.

Not fully operational at all times
Requires some setup before use
Can be activated relatively quickly
Cold Sites

A cold site provides only basic infrastructure.

Not immediately operational
Requires significant setup after a disruption
Least expensive option, but slowest recovery time

















Post-Incident Activity phase - The process of reviewing an incident to identify areas for improvement during incident handling.


Final report - Documentation that provides a comprehensive review of an incident.




Questions to ask:
What happened?
What time did it happen?
Who discovered it?
How did it get contained?
What were the actions taken for recovery?
What could have been done differently?


















Post-Incident Activity in the Incident Response Lifecycle

Earlier, you learned about the Containment, Eradication, and Recovery phase of the incident response process. This section focuses on the final stage of the NIST Incident Response Lifecycle: Post-Incident Activity.

This phase is dedicated to reviewing the incident, identifying lessons learned, and improving future incident response efforts. Every security incident provides valuable insights that can help strengthen an organization's security posture and response capabilities.

What is Post-Incident Activity?

The Post-Incident Activity phase occurs after an incident has been successfully contained, eliminated, and resolved. During this stage, organizations evaluate the entire incident handling process to determine what worked well and what could be improved.

Rather than simply closing the case, security teams use this opportunity to enhance procedures, technologies, and response strategies for future incidents.

Lessons Learned Meetings

One of the most important activities during this phase is conducting a lessons learned meeting, often referred to as a post-mortem review.

These meetings bring together everyone involved in responding to the incident. Their purpose is to review the incident from start to finish, assess response efforts, and identify opportunities for improvement.

The focus of these discussions is improvement and learning—not assigning blame.

Organizations typically conduct these meetings within two weeks after the incident has been fully resolved.

When Are Lessons Learned Meetings Needed?

Not every security incident requires a dedicated review meeting.

The decision often depends on:

Incident severity
Scope of impact
Business disruption
Regulatory requirements

Major incidents, such as ransomware attacks or significant data breaches, generally warrant a formal lessons learned session.

Common Questions Discussed

During a lessons learned meeting, teams often examine questions such as:

What occurred during the incident?
When did the incident begin?
How was it detected?
Who identified the issue?
How was the threat contained?
What recovery actions were performed?
What challenges were encountered?
What could have been done more effectively?

Answering these questions helps organizations understand both strengths and weaknesses in their response process.

Preparing for a Lessons Learned Meeting

Effective meetings require preparation.

Common best practices include:

Distributing an agenda before the meeting
Sharing relevant documentation beforehand
Assigning a moderator to guide discussions
Designating a scribe to record notes and action items
Ensuring all participants come prepared with relevant information

This structure helps maximize the value of the review process.

Developing Recommendations

A key outcome of a lessons learned meeting is the creation of actionable recommendations.

During the review, teams may discover:

Gaps in response procedures
Communication issues
Insufficient security controls
Delays in detection or escalation
Missing documentation
Ineffective tools or technologies

These findings are converted into prioritized recommendations that help strengthen future incident response efforts.

Examples of improvements include:

Updating incident response playbooks
Enhancing monitoring and alerting systems
Improving analyst training
Implementing additional security tools
Revising communication procedures

The goal is to reduce the likelihood of experiencing similar incidents in the future.

Final Incident Report

Another critical activity in the post-incident phase is creating a final incident report.

Throughout an investigation, security teams document evidence, actions taken, findings, and decisions. This information is compiled into a comprehensive report once the incident is closed.

The final report serves as the official record of the incident and provides valuable information for management, auditors, compliance teams, and future investigations.

Key Components of a Final Report

Although report formats vary between organizations, most final reports contain several common sections.

Executive Summary

A concise overview of the incident that highlights:

Major findings
Impact on the organization
Key response actions
Overall outcome

This section is often intended for executives and decision-makers.

Incident Timeline

A chronological record of important events, including:

Initial detection
Escalation activities
Investigation milestones
Containment actions
Recovery efforts
Incident closure

Accurate timestamps help reconstruct the sequence of events.

Investigation Details

This section documents the technical investigation and analysis performed during the incident.

Examples include:

Log analysis
Network traffic investigations
Malware analysis
Evidence collection
Threat intelligence findings

It explains how analysts determined the nature and scope of the incident.

Recommendations

The report concludes with recommended actions designed to improve future security operations.

These recommendations often originate from lessons learned discussions and focus on preventing similar incidents from occurring again.

The Importance of Audience Awareness

When preparing a final report, it is important to consider who will read it.

Different audiences require different levels of detail:

Security analysts may need technical findings and evidence.
Managers may need operational summaries.
Executives often prefer business-focused overviews with minimal technical jargon.

Tailoring the report to its audience improves communication and ensures that key information is understood by all stakeholders.

















Analysis: The process of examining and confirming security alerts to determine whether they represent a genuine threat.

Broken Chain of Custody: A situation where evidence handling records contain gaps, errors, or inconsistencies, potentially affecting the integrity of an investigation.

Business Continuity Plan (BCP): A formal document that describes how an organization will maintain or restore essential operations during and after a major disruption.

Chain of Custody: A documented record that tracks the possession, handling, and transfer of evidence throughout an incident investigation.

Containment: Actions taken to isolate an incident and prevent it from causing further harm to systems, networks, or data.

Crowdsourcing: The collection and sharing of information through collaboration with a large community of individuals or organizations.

Detection: The identification and recognition of security-related events as quickly as possible.

Documentation: Recorded information created and maintained to support a specific operational, investigative, or business purpose.

Eradication: The process of completely removing the root cause and artifacts of a security incident from affected environments.

Final Report: A comprehensive document that summarizes an incident, investigation findings, response actions, and recommendations.

Honeypot: A deliberately vulnerable decoy system designed to attract attackers and gather information about their activities.

Incident Response Plan: A structured document that defines the procedures and responsibilities for handling security incidents.

Indicators of Attack (IoA): Observable attacker behaviors or sequences of events that suggest an attack is currently taking place.

Indicators of Compromise (IoC): Evidence that may indicate a system has been targeted, compromised, or involved in malicious activity.

Intrusion Detection System (IDS): A security tool that monitors systems or networks for suspicious activity and generates alerts when potential threats are detected.

Lessons Learned Meeting: A post-incident review session where participants evaluate the incident and identify opportunities for improvement.

Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT): Information gathered and analyzed from publicly available sources to support investigations and threat analysis.

Playbook: A detailed guide that provides step-by-step instructions for performing specific security or operational tasks.

Post-Incident Activity: The final phase of incident response focused on reviewing the incident, documenting findings, and improving future response efforts.

Recovery: The process of restoring affected systems, services, and operations to their normal functioning state after an incident.

Resilience: The capability of an organization to prepare for, withstand, respond to, and recover from disruptions.

Standards: Established guidelines or reference frameworks that help organizations develop policies and consistent practices.

Threat Hunting: A proactive cybersecurity activity that involves searching for hidden threats that may have evaded automated detection systems.

Threat Intelligence: Verified and analyzed information about current or emerging threats that helps organizations understand and respond to risks.

Triage: The process of evaluating and ranking incidents based on their urgency, severity, and potential impact.

VirusTotal: A threat analysis platform that allows users to examine files, URLs, domains, and IP addresses for signs of malicious activity.























MODULE 4



Log details:
Date
Time
Location
Action
Names





Log analysis - The process of examining logs to identify events of interest.


Log types:
Network ( routers, proxies, Switches, firewalls)
System (O.S.)
Application 
Security (IDS and IPS)
Authentication














**Logs**

Data sources such as devices produce information in the form of events. A log is a structured record of activities that take place within an organization’s systems. Each log contains multiple log entries, and every entry describes a single event that occurred on a device or system. Initially, logs were mainly used to troubleshoot technical issues. For instance, error logs help explain why a failure happened and assist in identifying its root cause so it can be resolved. Today, almost all computing devices generate logs that provide useful insights far beyond basic troubleshooting.

Security teams collect logs from logging systems such as SIEM tools, which aggregate log data into a centralized location. Analysts use these logs for log analysis, which involves reviewing log data to detect events of interest. Logs are also essential in answering the five W’s of an investigation: who was involved, what happened, when it occurred, where it happened, and why it took place.

---

**Types of logs**

Depending on the source system, different kinds of logs can be generated. Common log types include:

* **Network logs:** Created by networking equipment like routers, firewalls, and switches.
* **System logs:** Produced by operating systems such as Windows, Linux, macOS, or Chrome OS.
* **Application logs:** Generated by software applications, including mobile or desktop apps, recording in-app activities.
* **Security logs:** Produced by tools like antivirus software or intrusion detection systems, capturing security-related actions such as file changes or deletions.
* **Authentication logs:** Recorded when login or authentication events occur, such as user sign-ins.

---

**Log details**

In general, logs include key information such as timestamp, location, action, and the user or process responsible. For example, an authentication log might look like:

Login Event [05:45:15] User1 successfully authenticated

Logs can also include more detailed information when needed. This is known as verbose logging, where extra context is added beyond the basic entry. For instance:

Login Event [2022/11/16 05:45:15.892673] auth_service.cc:470 User1 authenticated successfully from device1 (192.168.1.2)

---

**Log management**

Since every device generates logs, organizations often face large volumes of log data. Effective log management helps handle this by collecting, storing, analyzing, and disposing of logs in a structured way.

**What to log**

A key part of log management is deciding which data should be recorded. This varies between organizations based on their needs. Log sources should be selected based on their relevance to security or operational goals. In some cases, logging may be reduced to avoid unnecessary verbosity. Sensitive information, such as personal data like emails, phone numbers, or names (PII), often requires careful handling and may be restricted depending on legal requirements.

---

**Challenges of excessive logging**

While it may seem beneficial to record everything, overlogging can create problems. This is a common mistake. Not all data needs to be captured, even if it is technically possible. Excessive logging can lead to higher storage costs, increased maintenance effort, and system performance issues. It can also make it harder for analysts to quickly locate important security events within large datasets.

---

**Log retention**

Some industries are required to retain logs for specific time periods due to regulations. As a result, organizations must define retention rules within their log management policies.

Examples of regulated industries include:

* Government sectors under frameworks like FISMA
* Healthcare organizations under HIPAA
* Financial institutions governed by standards such as PCI DSS, GLBA, and SOX

---

**Log protection**

In addition to managing and retaining logs, protecting them is essential to ensure their integrity. Attackers may attempt to alter or delete logs to hide evidence of malicious activity.

One common defense is centralized log storage, where logs are sent to a dedicated logging server instead of being stored locally. This reduces the risk of tampering because attackers would need to bypass additional security layers to access the log data.



















Log contain:
Timestamps
System characteristics
Action




Commonly used log formats:
Syslog
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
eXtensible Markup Language (XML)
Comma Separated Values (CSV)














## Log Formats and Their Structure

Security analysts rely on logs to understand activities occurring across systems and networks. Through **log analysis**, analysts examine log data to identify important events, investigate incidents, and detect suspicious or malicious behavior. Because logs can appear in different formats, understanding how each format is structured is essential for effective analysis.

This section covers five widely used log formats:

* JSON
* Syslog
* XML
* CSV
* CEF

---

# JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)

**JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)** is a lightweight format used to store and exchange data. It is commonly used in web applications, APIs, and cloud environments because it is easy for both humans and machines to read.

JSON is built using several key components:

* Key-value pairs
* Commas
* Double quotes
* Curly brackets
* Square brackets

### Key-Value Pairs

A key-value pair links a field name (key) with its associated value.

Example:

```json
"Alert": "Malware"
```

The key is `"Alert"` and the value is `"Malware"`.

### Commas

Commas separate individual data items within a JSON object.

Example:

```json
"Alert": "Malware",
"AlertCode": 1090,
"Severity": 10
```

### Double Quotes

Text values (strings) are enclosed in double quotes.

Examples:

```json
"Alert": "Malware"
```

Numeric values typically do not require quotes:

```json
"AlertCode": 1090
```

### Curly Brackets

Curly brackets `{}` define an object, which stores multiple key-value pairs.

Example:

```json
"User": {
    "id": "1234",
    "name": "user",
    "role": "engineer"
}
```

In this example, `User` is an object containing multiple properties.

### Square Brackets

Square brackets `[]` define an array, which stores an ordered list of values.

Example:

```json
["Administrators", "Users", "Engineering"]
```

Arrays are useful for storing groups of related items.

---

# Syslog

**Syslog** is a widely adopted logging standard used for generating, transporting, and storing log data. The term "Syslog" can refer to three related functions:

### 1. Protocol

The Syslog protocol transfers logs to centralized logging servers.

Common ports:

* **514** – Unencrypted Syslog traffic
* **6514** – Encrypted Syslog traffic

### 2. Service

The Syslog service receives logs from multiple devices and forwards them to a central location for storage and analysis.

### 3. Log Format

Syslog is also a specific log format commonly used in Unix-based operating systems.

A Syslog entry generally contains:

* Header
* Structured Data
* Message

### Example Syslog Entry

```text
<236>1 2022-03-21T01:11:11.003Z virtual.machine.com evntslog - ID01 [user@32473 iut="1" eventSource="Application" eventID="9999"]
This is a log entry!
```

---

## Header

The header provides core event information such as:

### Timestamp

```text
2022-03-21T01:11:11.003Z
```

Breakdown:

* `2022-03-21` = Date (YYYY-MM-DD)
* `T` = Separator between date and time
* `01:11:11.003` = Time with milliseconds
* `Z` = UTC timezone indicator

### Hostname

```text
virtual.machine.com
```

Identifies the system that generated the log.

### Application Name

```text
evntslog
```

Specifies the application responsible for creating the log.

### Message ID

```text
ID01
```

Provides an identifier for the log message.

---

## Structured Data

Structured data appears within square brackets and contains additional information in key-value format.

Example:

```text
[user@32473 iut="1" eventSource="Application" eventID="9999"]
```

This section supplies extra context regarding the event.

---

## Message

The message section contains the detailed description of the event.

Example:

```text
This is a log entry!
```

---

## Priority (PRI)

The Priority field appears within angle brackets.

Example:

```text
<236>
```

The PRI value indicates the event's urgency and importance. Generally, lower values correspond to higher-priority events.

**Note:** Syslog entries can incorporate formats such as JSON or XML, and organizations may also create custom log formats.

---

# XML (eXtensible Markup Language)

**XML** is both a markup language and a data format used to store and transfer information. It is commonly associated with Windows-based systems and applications.

XML uses:

* Tags
* Elements
* Attributes

---

## Tags

Tags identify and enclose data.

Each tag has:

* Opening tag
* Closing tag

Example:

```xml
<Event>
</Event>
```

The closing tag contains a forward slash.

---

## Elements

An XML element consists of the tags and the data contained within them.

Example:

```xml
<Event>
    <EventID>4688</EventID>
    <Version>5</Version>
</Event>
```

Here:

* `<Event>` is the root element
* `<EventID>` and `<Version>` are child elements

Every XML document must contain at least one root element.

---

## Attributes

Attributes provide extra information about elements.

Example:

```xml
<EventData>
    <Data Name="SubjectUserSid">S-2-3-11-160321</Data>
    <Data Name="SubjectUserName">JSMITH</Data>
    <Data Name="SubjectDomainName">ADCOMP</Data>
    <Data Name="SubjectLogonId">0x1cf1c12</Data>
    <Data Name="NewProcessId">0x1404</Data>
</EventData>
```

In the first entry:

```xml
Name="SubjectUserSid"
```

is an attribute describing the value stored within the element.

Attributes must always be enclosed in either single or double quotation marks.

---

# CSV (Comma-Separated Values)

**CSV** is a simple format that stores information as values separated by commas.

In CSV logs:

* Data appears in a fixed order
* Field names may not be shown
* Understanding the source device's field layout is essential

### Example CSV Log

```text
2009-11-24T21:27:09.534255,ALERT,192.168.2.7,1041,x.x.250.50,80,TCP,ALLOWED,1:2001999:9,"ET MALWARE BTGrab.com Spyware Downloading Ads",1
```

Each value represents a predefined field, such as timestamp, source IP, destination IP, protocol, action, and alert description.

Because field names are often absent, analysts must understand the logging format used by the device generating the data.

---

# Common Event Format (CEF)

**Common Event Format (CEF)** is a standardized log format designed to make security events easier to parse and analyze across different products.

CEF uses a combination of:

* Pipe-separated fields
* Key-value pairs

### Standard CEF Structure

```text
CEF:Version|Device Vendor|Device Product|Device Version|Signature ID|Name|Severity|Extension
```

Each field is separated by the pipe (`|`) character.

---

## Example CEF Entry

```text
Sep 29 08:26:10 host CEF:1|Security|threatmanager|1.0|100|worm successfully stopped|10|src=10.0.0.2 dst=2.1.2.2 spt=1232
```

---

## Field Breakdown

| Field            | Value                     |
| ---------------- | ------------------------- |
| Syslog Timestamp | Sep 29 08:26:10           |
| Syslog Hostname  | host                      |
| Version          | CEF:1                     |
| Device Vendor    | Security                  |
| Device Product   | threatmanager             |
| Device Version   | 1.0                       |
| Signature ID     | 100                       |
| Name             | worm successfully stopped |
| Severity         | 10                        |

---

## Extension Field

The Extension section stores additional event details using key-value pairs.

Example:

```text
src=10.0.0.2
dst=2.1.2.2
spt=1232
```

Where:

* `src` = Source IP address
* `dst` = Destination IP address
* `spt` = Source port number

The Extension field is optional but commonly used to provide additional context.

---

## Event Interpretation

The sample CEF log indicates that:

* A security product named **threatmanager** detected worm-related activity.
* The threat originated from **10.0.0.2**.
* The destination was **2.1.2.2**.
* Communication used source port **1232**.
* The threat was successfully blocked.
* The event was assigned a high severity level of **10**.

**Note:** Both the Syslog prefix and Extension section are optional components in a CEF log entry.



















Telemetry - The collection and transmission of data for analysis.

Intrusion detection system (IDS) - An application that monitors activity and alerts on possible intrusions.

Endpoint - Any device connected on a network.




Host-based intrusion detection system - An application that monitors the activity of the host on which it's installed.


Network-based intrusion detection system - An application that collects and monitors network traffic and network data.


Signature analysis - A detection method used to find events of interest.














# Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Detection Techniques

This section explores the different types of **Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)** and the methods they use to identify potential security threats. Understanding how IDS technologies operate, along with their strengths and weaknesses, helps security analysts effectively investigate and respond to suspicious activity.

An **Intrusion Detection System (IDS)** is a security solution that continuously monitors systems or networks for signs of malicious behavior and generates alerts when suspicious activity is detected. Depending on where monitoring takes place, IDS technologies are categorized as either host-based or network-based.

---

# Host-Based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS)

A **Host-Based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS)** monitors the activity occurring on the specific device where it is installed. The software runs as an agent on an endpoint, such as a workstation, laptop, or server.

Organizations commonly deploy HIDS agents across multiple endpoints to improve visibility into host-level activities. The system examines internal operations and identifies unusual or unauthorized behavior. For example, if an unapproved application is installed on a device, the HIDS can record the event and generate an alert.

In addition to monitoring incoming and outgoing network traffic, HIDS solutions may also track:

* File system changes
* Resource utilization
* User actions
* Process execution
* System configuration modifications

Because HIDS focuses on a single device, it provides detailed visibility into activities occurring directly on that host.

---

# Network-Based Intrusion Detection System (NIDS)

A **Network-Based Intrusion Detection System (NIDS)** monitors traffic moving across a network rather than activity on an individual device.

NIDS software is typically placed at strategic locations within the network where it can observe communications between systems. It analyzes packets and network data traveling through the monitored segment and searches for signs of malicious activity.

When suspicious traffic is detected, the NIDS:

1. Records the event
2. Generates an alert
3. Provides information for further investigation

Unlike HIDS, which focuses on a single endpoint, NIDS provides visibility across multiple systems and network communications.

---

# Combining HIDS and NIDS

Many organizations deploy both HIDS and NIDS together to strengthen security monitoring.

This layered approach provides:

* Visibility into host-level activity
* Visibility into network-level communications
* Improved threat detection capabilities
* More complete security monitoring coverage

Since each technology observes a different part of the environment, combining them creates a broader and more comprehensive view of system activity.

---

# Detection Techniques Used by IDS

IDS technologies commonly rely on two primary detection methods:

1. Signature-Based Analysis
2. Anomaly-Based Analysis

Each approach identifies threats differently and offers unique benefits and limitations.

---

# Signature-Based Analysis

**Signature-Based Analysis** detects threats by comparing activity against predefined patterns known as signatures.

A **signature** is a recognizable characteristic associated with malicious behavior. Signatures may include:

* Specific byte sequences
* Binary patterns
* Known malicious code fragments
* IP addresses
* Indicators of Compromise (IoCs)
* Attack techniques and behaviors

Security teams often create signatures based on known threats and attack patterns.

For example, an anti-malware solution may contain signatures that match specific malware code. If the IDS observes activity that matches one of these signatures, it records the event and generates an alert.

---

## Advantages of Signature-Based Analysis

### Low False Positive Rate

Since detection relies on known patterns, signature-based systems are generally accurate when identifying previously documented threats.

This reduces the number of **false positives**, which occur when a legitimate activity is mistakenly identified as malicious.

### Efficient Detection of Known Threats

Known malware, exploits, and attack techniques can often be detected quickly and reliably.

---

## Disadvantages of Signature-Based Analysis

### Signatures Can Be Bypassed

Attackers can modify malware or change their techniques to avoid matching existing signatures.

Even small alterations to malicious code may prevent detection.

### Frequent Updates Are Required

As new threats emerge, security vendors must continually create and distribute updated signatures.

Without regular updates, detection effectiveness decreases.

### Cannot Detect Unknown Threats

Since detection depends on existing signatures, previously unseen attacks cannot be identified.

Examples include:

* Zero-day exploits
* New malware variants
* Emerging attack techniques

---

# Anomaly-Based Analysis

**Anomaly-Based Analysis** identifies suspicious activity by detecting deviations from normal behavior.

This method operates in two phases:

### Training Phase

During the training phase, the system collects information about normal activity and establishes a baseline.

The baseline may include:

* Typical network traffic patterns
* User behavior
* System performance metrics
* Application activity

### Detection Phase

After the baseline is established, current activity is compared against it.

Any behavior that significantly differs from expected patterns is considered anomalous and may trigger an alert.

---

## Advantages of Anomaly-Based Analysis

### Detects Unknown Threats

Unlike signature-based methods, anomaly detection does not depend on predefined threat patterns.

As a result, it can identify:

* Previously unseen malware
* Novel attack methods
* Advanced persistent threats
* Zero-day attacks

### Adapts to Changing Threats

Since detection focuses on abnormal behavior rather than known signatures, anomaly-based systems can recognize evolving attack techniques.

---

## Disadvantages of Anomaly-Based Analysis

### High False Positive Rate

Not every unusual event is malicious.

Legitimate activities that differ from normal patterns may also trigger alerts, leading to a larger number of false positives.

### Baseline Contamination

If an attacker is already present while the baseline is being created, malicious activity may be mistakenly classified as normal behavior.

This can reduce detection effectiveness and allow existing threats to remain unnoticed.

---
















Components of a NIDS rule (Network Intrusion Detection System) :
1. Action
2. Header
3. Rule options





Action : 
Determines the action to take if the rule criteria is met.
Alert, pass, or reject


Header:
Source and destination IP addresses
Source and destination ports
Protocols 
Traffic directions





Suricata format type:
EVE JSON - Extensible Event Format JavaScript Object Notation


Suricata log types:
Alert logs
Network telemetry logs













# Suricata Overview, Rules, and Configuration

In cybersecurity, intrusion detection systems rely on signatures to identify suspicious or malicious activity. One of the most widely used open-source tools for this purpose is **Suricata**. Understanding how Suricata works, how its rules are structured, and how it is configured is an important skill for security analysts responsible for deploying, maintaining, and tuning detection systems.

---

# Introduction to Suricata

**Suricata** is an open-source security platform that provides intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, and network monitoring capabilities. It is designed to inspect network traffic, identify threats, and generate alerts based on predefined or customized detection rules.

Because of its flexibility and powerful detection features, Suricata is commonly used in enterprise environments to strengthen network security monitoring.

---

# Primary Uses of Suricata

Suricata can operate in several different modes depending on an organization's security needs.

## 1. Intrusion Detection System (IDS)

As an **Intrusion Detection System (IDS)**, Suricata monitors network traffic and generates alerts whenever suspicious or potentially malicious activity is detected.

Suricata can function as:

* A Network-Based IDS (NIDS) that monitors network traffic
* A Host-Based IDS (HIDS) that monitors activity on a single endpoint

In IDS mode, Suricata identifies threats but does not automatically block them.

---

## 2. Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)

Suricata can also be configured as an **Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)**.

In IPS mode, the tool not only detects threats but can actively prevent malicious activity by blocking harmful traffic before it reaches its target.

Additional configuration is required to enable IPS functionality, including activating prevention features within the system.

---

## 3. Network Security Monitoring (NSM)

Suricata can be used for **Network Security Monitoring (NSM)**, where its primary role is collecting, analyzing, and storing network data.

In NSM mode, Suricata can:

* Inspect live network traffic
* Analyze previously captured packet data
* Generate packet captures (PCAPs)
* Store detailed network logs

These capabilities are particularly useful for:

* Digital forensics
* Incident response investigations
* Threat hunting
* Signature testing and refinement

For example, analysts can intentionally trigger an alert, capture the associated network traffic, and then review the collected logs to improve detection rules.

---

# Suricata Rules (Signatures)

Suricata relies on **rules**, also called **signatures**, to identify events of interest within network traffic.

A rule defines the characteristics of traffic or behavior that Suricata should detect.

Security teams use signatures to:

* Detect malicious activity
* Generate alerts
* Monitor network behavior
* Improve visibility into systems
* Identify potential vulnerabilities

The terms **rule** and **signature** are commonly used interchangeably in Suricata.

---

# Components of a Suricata Rule

A Suricata signature consists of three primary components:

## 1. Action

The **action** specifies what Suricata should do when a rule matches network traffic.

Common actions include:

| Action | Purpose                             |
| ------ | ----------------------------------- |
| alert  | Generate an alert                   |
| pass   | Ignore matching traffic             |
| drop   | Block matching traffic              |
| reject | Block traffic and notify the sender |

The action is always the first element of a rule.

---

## 2. Header

The **header** defines the traffic characteristics that must match before the rule is triggered.

Typical header information includes:

* Source IP address
* Destination IP address
* Source port
* Destination port
* Protocol (TCP, UDP, ICMP, etc.)
* Traffic direction

The header tells Suricata what traffic should be inspected.

---

## 3. Rule Options

**Rule options** provide additional customization and detection logic.

These options can define:

* Specific content to search for
* Metadata
* Message text
* Severity information
* Additional matching conditions

The order of rule options is important because changing their arrangement can alter how the rule behaves.

---

# Rule Processing Order

Although rules are generally evaluated according to their placement within configuration files, Suricata applies actions according to a default priority sequence:

1. pass
2. drop
3. reject
4. alert

This processing order becomes important when multiple rules match the same packet.

For example, if one rule generates an alert while another blocks the same packet, the action with higher processing priority determines the final outcome.

---

# Custom Rules

Suricata includes a large collection of prebuilt detection rules. However, organizations are encouraged to customize these rules to fit their own environments and security requirements.

Every organization has:

* Different infrastructure
* Different applications
* Different network architectures
* Different security priorities

Because of these differences, a standard rule set rarely provides optimal results without modification.

---

## Benefits of Custom Rules

Custom signatures allow organizations to:

* Improve detection accuracy
* Monitor organization-specific threats
* Reduce unnecessary alerts
* Minimize false positives
* Increase visibility into critical assets

Developing effective custom rules is a valuable skill because it enables security teams to maximize the effectiveness of their detection systems.

---

# Suricata Configuration File

Before Suricata can monitor traffic, it must be configured properly.

A **configuration file** contains the settings that determine how the application operates.

Configuration files allow administrators to control:

* Detection behavior
* Logging settings
* Network interfaces
* Rule locations
* IPS functionality
* Output formats

Suricata uses a configuration file called:

```text
suricata.yaml
```

This file follows the **YAML** format, which is designed to be both human-readable and easy to modify.

---

# Suricata Log Files

When Suricata detects activity and generates alerts, it records information in log files.

Two commonly used log files are:

* eve.json
* fast.log

---

## eve.json

The **eve.json** file is Suricata's primary logging format.

It stores detailed event information in JSON format and includes extensive metadata about detected activity.

Information commonly found in eve.json includes:

* Alert details
* Protocol information
* Source and destination addresses
* Timestamps
* Network flow information
* Event metadata

A particularly useful field is:

```text
flow_id
```

The **flow_id** uniquely identifies a network session and helps analysts correlate multiple alerts and events associated with the same communication flow.

### Advantages of eve.json

* Highly detailed
* Easy to parse
* SIEM-friendly
* Useful for threat hunting
* Valuable for incident response investigations

Because of its rich data structure, eve.json is the preferred log source for advanced analysis.

---

## fast.log

The **fast.log** file provides a simplified alert format.

It records only basic information such as:

* Source IP address
* Destination IP address
* Port information
* Alert message

This format was designed primarily for quick alert visibility and basic logging.

### Limitations of fast.log

* Minimal detail
* Limited context
* Not ideal for investigations
* Poor suitability for threat hunting

As a result, fast.log is generally considered a legacy logging format.

---

# eve.json vs fast.log

| Feature           | eve.json  | fast.log        |
| ----------------- | --------- | --------------- |
| Format            | JSON      | Plain text      |
| Detail Level      | High      | Low             |
| Metadata          | Extensive | Minimal         |
| SIEM Integration  | Excellent | Limited         |
| Threat Hunting    | Suitable  | Not Recommended |
| Incident Response | Suitable  | Limited         |
| Log Parsing       | Easy      | Basic           |

---



















# Log Ingestion in SIEM Systems

Understanding how data enters a **Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)** platform is essential for security analysts. SIEM tools depend on log data to detect suspicious activity, investigate incidents, and monitor the overall security posture of an organization. Knowing how logs are collected and ingested helps analysts better understand the available data and improve incident detection and response.

---

# Overview of the SIEM Process

A SIEM platform typically performs three major functions:

## 1. Data Collection and Aggregation

The SIEM gathers event information from multiple sources across the environment.

These sources may include:

* Servers
* Workstations
* Firewalls
* Network devices
* Security applications
* Cloud services

The collected data is stored centrally for analysis.

---

## 2. Data Normalization

After collection, the SIEM converts incoming data into a consistent format through a process known as **normalization**.

Normalization helps:

* Standardize log structures
* Improve readability
* Simplify searching
* Enable efficient correlation between different data sources

Although normalization is a common SIEM capability, the quality and depth of normalization can vary between platforms.

---

## 3. Data Analysis

Once normalized, the data is organized and indexed.

The SIEM then analyzes the information to:

* Identify suspicious behavior
* Correlate related events
* Detect attack patterns
* Generate alerts

This analytical capability allows security teams to quickly recognize potential threats and investigate incidents.

---

# What Is Log Ingestion?

Before a SIEM can analyze data, it must first receive it through **log ingestion**.

**Log ingestion** is the process of collecting, importing, and storing log data from various sources within a SIEM platform.

Any system capable of generating logs can serve as a log source, including:

* Servers
* Endpoints
* Network devices
* Security appliances
* Applications
* Cloud platforms

During ingestion, the SIEM creates its own copy of the incoming log data and stores it internally. This allows the platform to process and analyze information without altering the original logs located on source systems.

By centralizing event data, security analysts gain a single location from which they can investigate and respond to security events.

Examples of ingested data include:

* Login and authentication events
* Network communications
* Application activity
* System events
* Security alerts

---

# Importance of Log Ingestion

Log ingestion serves as the foundation of a SIEM's functionality.

Without properly collected data, a SIEM cannot:

* Detect threats
* Generate meaningful alerts
* Correlate events
* Support investigations

Effective log ingestion ensures that analysts have complete visibility across the environment and can identify security incidents more efficiently.

---

# Log Forwarders

Organizations often generate enormous amounts of log data from thousands of devices. Manually collecting and uploading this information is impractical and inefficient.

To solve this problem, organizations commonly use **log forwarders**.

A **log forwarder** is software that automatically collects logs from a system and sends them to a designated destination, such as a SIEM platform.

---

## How Log Forwarders Work

The process generally follows these steps:

1. Logs are generated on a device.
2. The log forwarder collects the selected logs.
3. The forwarder sends the logs to the SIEM.
4. The SIEM ingests, normalizes, and analyzes the data.

This automation significantly reduces the effort required to collect and manage log information.

---

# Native and Third-Party Log Forwarders

Some operating systems include built-in log forwarding capabilities.

When native forwarding tools are unavailable, organizations can install third-party log forwarding software.

After installation, administrators configure the forwarder to determine:

* Which logs should be collected
* Where the logs should be sent
* How frequently logs should be transmitted

Once configured, logs are automatically delivered to the SIEM for processing.

---

# Benefits of Log Forwarders

Using log forwarders provides several advantages:

### Automation

Automatically collects and transfers log data without manual intervention.

### Centralization

Brings logs from multiple systems into a single platform for analysis.

### Scalability

Supports large environments containing thousands of devices.

### Faster Analysis

Ensures data reaches the SIEM quickly for monitoring and threat detection.

### Improved Visibility

Provides analysts with a comprehensive view of activity across the organization.

---

# Proprietary vs. Open-Source Forwarders

Many SIEM vendors provide their own proprietary log forwarding solutions designed to integrate directly with their platforms.

Organizations may also choose open-source log forwarders depending on their requirements.

Selecting an appropriate forwarder depends on factors such as:

* Infrastructure compatibility
* Organizational requirements
* Performance needs
* Supported log sources
* Security considerations

There is no universal solution that fits every environment.

---















Search processing language (SPL) - Splunk's query language


YARA-L => A computer language used to create rules for searching through ingested log data.


Types of search:
1. UDM search
2. Raw log search














# Searching for Security Events in SIEM Tools

Security analysts use **Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)** platforms to collect, store, and analyze security-related data from multiple sources. A major benefit of SIEM tools is their ability to search large volumes of event data quickly, helping analysts investigate incidents, identify suspicious behavior, and support threat detection activities.

Different SIEM platforms use different search languages and methodologies. Understanding how these search mechanisms work allows analysts to efficiently locate relevant events during security investigations.

This section explores how searching is performed in two widely used SIEM platforms:

* Splunk
* Google Security Operations (Chronicle)

---

# Searching in Splunk

Splunk uses its own query language called **Search Processing Language (SPL)**.

SPL enables users to:

* Search event data
* Filter results
* Transform data
* Create reports and visualizations
* Investigate security incidents

Searches are typically performed through Splunk's Search & Reporting interface.

---

## Basic SPL Search

A simple SPL query might look like:

```spl id="g0v6k9"
index=main fail
```

### Breakdown

#### index=main

This instructs Splunk to search an index named **main**.

An **index** is a storage location where Splunk keeps collected and processed event data.

#### fail

This is the search keyword.

Splunk returns events containing the word **fail**.

---

## Benefits of SPL

Effective use of SPL helps analysts:

* Find data faster
* Reduce investigation time
* Filter unnecessary information
* Locate precise security events
* Analyze data from multiple sources

SPL supports a wide range of advanced commands and functions beyond basic searching.

---

# Using Pipes in SPL

Like Linux command-line environments, Splunk uses the pipe character (`|`) to chain commands together.

A pipe takes the output of one command and passes it as input to the next command.

This allows analysts to refine search results step by step within a single query.

---

## Example of a Piped Search

```spl id="f5s8my"
index=main fail | chart count by host
```

### Breakdown

#### index=main fail

Searches the **main** index for events containing the term **fail**.

#### |

The pipe operator links the first command to the second.

#### chart count by host

This command transforms the results into a chart showing:

* Number of matching events
* Grouped by host name

This can help identify systems generating unusually high numbers of failures.

---

# Using Wildcards in Splunk

A **wildcard** is a special character used to represent one or more unknown characters.

In many SPL searches, the asterisk (`*`) functions as a wildcard.

Wildcards are useful when searching for terms that may appear in multiple forms.

---

## Example Wildcard Search

```spl id="k4u2yl"
index=main fail*
```

### Breakdown

#### index=main

Searches the **main** index.

#### fail*

Returns events containing words that begin with **fail**.

Possible matches include:

* fail
* failed
* failure
* failing

Using wildcards expands search coverage and helps locate related events.

---

# Searching Exact Phrases

Sometimes analysts need to search for an exact sequence of words rather than individual terms.

In Splunk, quotation marks are used to search for an exact phrase.

Example:

```spl id="iwgxj6"
"login failure"
```

This query only matches events containing the complete phrase:

```text id="0lr47e"
login failure
```

It will not return events where the words appear separately.

---

# Searching in Google Security Operations (Chronicle)

Google Security Operations, formerly known as Chronicle, provides multiple methods for searching security events.

Analysts can search directly through the search interface and further refine results using **Procedural Filtering**.

Filters can:

* Include specific event types
* Exclude unwanted results
* Restrict searches to certain log sources
* Narrow investigations

Chronicle supports two primary search types:

1. Unified Data Model (UDM) Search
2. Raw Log Search

---

# Unified Data Model (UDM) Search

The **UDM Search** is Chronicle's default search method.

This search operates on data that has already been:

* Ingested
* Parsed
* Normalized
* Indexed

Because the data is structured, UDM searches generally return results much faster than raw log searches.

---

## UDM Fields

UDM events contain standardized fields that make searching consistent across different log sources.

Common UDM categories include:

### Entities

Entities describe objects involved in an event.

Examples include:

* Users
* Devices
* Processes
* IP addresses
* Hostnames

Every UDM event contains at least one entity.

---

### Event Metadata

Event metadata provides descriptive information about an event.

Examples include:

* Event type
* Timestamps
* Authentication activity
* Connection events

---

### Network Metadata

This field contains networking information such as:

* Protocol details
* Network connections
* Communication information

---

### Security Results

This field records security outcomes generated by security tools.

Examples include:

* Malware detected
* File quarantined
* Threat blocked
* Policy violation identified

---

# Example UDM Search

```text id="z2uxu3"
metadata.event_type = "USER_LOGIN"
```

### Breakdown

#### metadata.event_type

Specifies the category of event being searched.

#### USER_LOGIN

Returns authentication-related events involving user logins.

This is often used when investigating account activity or suspicious authentication attempts.

---

# Advantages of UDM Search

UDM searches offer several benefits:

* Faster results
* Standardized field structure
* Easier querying
* Better correlation across data sources
* Simplified investigations

Because the data is normalized, analysts spend less time dealing with inconsistent log formats.

---

# Raw Log Search

Sometimes important details are unavailable within normalized UDM fields.

In these situations, analysts can perform a **Raw Log Search**.

A Raw Log Search examines the original unprocessed log data instead of normalized records.

---

## Characteristics of Raw Log Search

Raw Log Search:

* Searches original logs
* Does not rely on normalization
* Provides maximum visibility into event data
* Requires more processing time

Because raw logs are unstructured, searches generally take longer than UDM searches.

---

## Common Search Items

Analysts often search raw logs for:

* Usernames
* Filenames
* Hash values
* IP addresses
* Domains
* Specific text strings

Chronicle returns any events containing the specified information.

---

# Regular Expressions in Raw Log Searches

Raw Log Search supports **regular expressions (regex)**.

Regular expressions allow analysts to search for complex patterns instead of exact values.

Examples include:

* Matching IP address patterns
* Identifying email formats
* Finding filenames with specific extensions
* Detecting repeated character sequences

Regex can significantly improve search precision when investigating large datasets.

---

# Splunk vs. Chronicle Search Comparison

| Feature                | Splunk                | Google SecOps (Chronicle)        |
| ---------------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| Query Language         | SPL                   | UDM Queries / Raw Searches       |
| Structured Search      | Yes                   | Yes                              |
| Raw Log Search         | Supported             | Supported                        |
| Data Normalization     | Index-Based           | UDM-Based                        |
| Filtering Capabilities | Extensive             | Procedural Filtering             |
| Wildcard Support       | Yes                   | Yes                              |
| Regex Support          | Yes                   | Yes                              |
| Visualization Support  | Built-in SPL Commands | Available Through Platform Tools |

---














:

🛡️ Cybersecurity & SIEM Key Terms (Reframed)
🔍 Detection & Analysis Methods
Anomaly-based analysis: Detects unusual or abnormal system behavior compared to a baseline.
Signature analysis: Identifies threats by matching known malicious patterns (signatures).
False positive: An alert that incorrectly indicates a threat when none exists.
📊 Logging & Data Handling
Log: A recorded event from a system, application, or network.
Logging: The process of recording system and network events.
Log analysis: Examining logs to identify security-relevant events.
Log management: Collecting, storing, analyzing, and disposing of logs in an organized way.
Telemetry: Automatically collected and transmitted system data for monitoring and analysis.
🧩 Data Types & Structures
Array: Ordered list of values separated by commas.
Object: Data structure made of key–value pairs.
Key-value pair: A linked set of data consisting of a key and its associated value.
🌐 Network & Endpoint Security
Endpoint: Any device connected to a network.
Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR): Monitors endpoints for suspicious or malicious activity.
Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS): Monitors activity on a single host device.
Network-based Intrusion Detection System (NIDS): Monitors network traffic for malicious activity.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS): Detects and alerts on potential intrusions in a system or network.
⚙️ Tools, Formats & Languages
Security Information and Event Management (SIEM): System that collects, analyzes, and correlates log data for security monitoring.
Common Event Format (CEF): Standardized log format using key–value pairs.
Search Processing Language (SPL): Query language used in Splunk for searching log data.
YARA-L: Language used to write detection rules for log analysis.
Suricata: Open-source IDS/IPS tool for network monitoring and threat detection.
🧠 Threat Concepts
Signature: A known pattern of malicious activity.
Zero-day: A previously unknown vulnerability or exploit before a fix exists.
🧾 System & Config Concepts
Configuration file: File used to define settings and behavior of applications.
Wildcard: A special character that represents one or more unknown characters in searches.