Tools of the Trade: Linux and SQL



module 1
Operating system (OS) - The interface between computer hardware and the user.

Hardware - The physical components of a computer.

 




Common Operating Systems

Several operating systems are widely used in the cybersecurity field, including Windows, macOS, Linux, ChromeOS, Android, and iOS. Understanding these systems is important because each has unique security features, architectures, and vulnerabilities.

Windows and macOS

Windows and macOS are two of the most commonly used operating systems for personal and business computers.

Windows, introduced in 1985, is a closed-source operating system. This means its source code is not publicly available.
macOS, first released in 1984, combines both open-source and proprietary components. Some parts, such as the kernel, are open source, while other sections remain private.

Both operating systems are heavily used in enterprise environments and are frequent targets for cyberattacks due to their popularity.

Linux

Linux was first released in 1991 and is fully open source. Anyone can access, modify, and distribute its source code. Because of this openness, developers worldwide contribute to improving Linux distributions.

Linux plays a major role in cybersecurity because many security tools and specialized operating systems are built on it. Certain Linux distributions are specifically designed for penetration testing, digital forensics, and security analysis.

ChromeOS

ChromeOS became available in 2011 and is based on Chromium OS. Chromium OS is entirely open source, while ChromeOS includes both open-source and proprietary elements.

ChromeOS is commonly used in educational institutions because of its lightweight design, cloud integration, and simplified management features.

Android and iOS

Android and iOS are operating systems designed primarily for mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets, and smartwatches.

Android was publicly released in 2008 and is largely open source.
iOS, introduced in 2007, is partially open source with many proprietary components.

Mobile operating systems have become increasingly important in cybersecurity due to the growth of mobile applications, cloud services, and mobile-based attacks.

Operating Systems and Security Risks

All operating systems can contain vulnerabilities, regardless of how secure they are designed to be. One of the most effective ways to reduce security risks is by regularly updating the operating system and its software components.

Legacy Operating Systems

A legacy operating system refers to software that is outdated but still in use. Organizations may continue using older systems because certain applications or hardware are incompatible with newer versions.

This is especially common in industries that rely on specialized equipment with embedded software.

Legacy systems create significant security concerns because vendors may stop providing updates and patches. Without ongoing support, these systems become more exposed to newly discovered threats and attacks.

Additional Vulnerabilities

Even fully updated operating systems can still face security issues. Cybersecurity professionals often monitor official vulnerability databases and vendor security bulletins to stay informed about emerging threats.

Examples include:

Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC) for Microsoft products
Apple Security Updates for macOS and iOS
Ubuntu CVE reports for Linux vulnerabilities
Google Cloud Security Bulletins for Google-related services

Staying informed about vulnerabilities and maintaining updated systems are essential responsibilities for security analysts and IT professionals.





Application - A program that performs a specific task.






Booting a Computer

When a computer is powered on, a small chip called either the BIOS or UEFI begins the startup process.

BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) is an older firmware technology that contains startup instructions for the computer.
UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface) is the modern replacement for BIOS and includes improved functionality and stronger security features.

Both BIOS and UEFI perform similar tasks during startup. Their role is to initialize the system, check hardware components, and prepare the computer to load the operating system. UEFI became more common after 2007 and is now standard in most modern computers.

One important responsibility of BIOS or UEFI is verifying that hardware components are functioning properly. After these checks are completed, the firmware activates the bootloader, which is a program responsible for loading the operating system into memory.

Once the operating system finishes loading, the computer becomes ready for normal use.

How a Computer Completes Tasks

After startup, computers perform tasks through cooperation between four main components:

User
Application
Operating System
Hardware
1. User

The process begins with the user. A user starts an action they want the computer to perform, such as opening a website, editing a document, or downloading a file.

2. Application

Applications are software programs designed to help users complete specific tasks.

Examples include:

A calculator app for mathematical operations
A word processor for creating documents
A web browser for accessing the internet

The application receives the user’s input and forwards the request to the operating system.

3. Operating System

The operating system (OS) acts as a manager between software and hardware. It interprets requests from applications and decides how system resources should be used to complete the task.

The OS communicates with hardware components and coordinates the work required for processing data.

4. Hardware

Hardware components perform the actual processing work.

Examples include:

The CPU handling calculations and instructions
The hard drive or SSD storing and retrieving files
Memory components temporarily holding data during processing

After the hardware completes the requested action, the result is returned to the operating system, then back to the application, where it is displayed to the user.

Understanding the OS Through Analogies
Car Analogy

Using a computer is similar to driving a car. A driver presses the accelerator and the car moves forward, even though the driver may not fully understand the engine’s internal processes.

In the same way, users interact with applications while the operating system quietly handles complex background operations.

Restaurant Analogy

The operating system can also be compared to a restaurant kitchen.

The customer represents the user.
The food order represents the request made through an application.
The kitchen staff represent the operating system and hardware working behind the scenes.

A customer only sees the final meal, not the preparation process. Similarly, computer users only see the completed result, while the OS manages the internal operations required to fulfill the request.

Example: Downloading a File

The process of downloading a file demonstrates how users, applications, the OS, and hardware work together.

Step 1: User Action

The user clicks a download button in a web browser.

Step 2: Application Request

The web browser sends the download request to the operating system.

Step 3: OS Coordination

The operating system processes the request and directs the appropriate hardware components to begin downloading the file.

Step 4: Hardware Processing

The hardware handles network communication and stores the downloaded file on the storage device.

Step 5: Output to User

After the download is complete, the operating system informs the browser application, which then notifies the user that the file has been successfully downloaded.













What is a Virtual Machine?

A virtual machine (VM) is a software-based version of a physical computer. It behaves like a real computer even though it does not exist as separate physical hardware.

Virtual machines are created through a technology called virtualization. Virtualization uses software to simulate physical hardware components such as:

CPU
Storage
Memory (RAM)
Network interfaces

Because of virtualization, a single physical computer can run multiple independent virtual machines at the same time.

How Virtual Machines Work

A physical computer, known as the host machine, shares its hardware resources with several virtual machines.

Each VM functions like an independent computer and usually includes:

Its own operating system
Applications
Virtual hardware resources

For example, if a host computer has 16 GB of RAM, the memory can be divided among multiple virtual machines and the host system itself. Three virtual machines could each receive 4 GB of RAM while the remaining memory is used by the host operating system.

Even though the virtual machines share the same physical hardware, they operate separately from one another.

Benefits of Virtual Machines

Virtual machines are widely used in cybersecurity and IT because they improve both security and efficiency.

Security Advantages

One major advantage of virtualization is isolation. Virtual machines operate in separate environments called sandboxes.

Because VMs are isolated:

Problems inside one VM usually do not affect others
Malware infections can be contained more safely
Security professionals can analyze suspicious files in controlled environments

For example, cybersecurity analysts often run malware inside a VM to study its behavior without risking the main system.

However, virtualization is not completely risk-free. Some advanced malicious software may escape the virtual environment and access the host machine. Because of this, virtual machines should still be used carefully and securely.

Efficiency Advantages

Virtualization also improves efficiency by allowing multiple systems to run on one physical computer.

Benefits include:

Running several operating systems simultaneously
Quickly switching between environments
Testing software without separate hardware
Reducing equipment costs

A useful comparison is a city bus. Instead of every person driving a separate car, many passengers share one vehicle. Similarly, many virtual machines can share one physical computer, reducing hardware usage and resource waste.

Managing Virtual Machines

Virtual machines are controlled using software called a hypervisor.

A hypervisor:

Creates and manages virtual machines
Connects virtual hardware to physical hardware
Allocates system resources such as CPU power, RAM, and storage

One important hypervisor is KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine).

KVM:

Is open source
Works with many Linux distributions
Is built directly into the Linux kernel
Allows Linux systems to create and manage virtual machines without requiring additional virtualization software
Other Types of Virtualization

Virtualization is not limited to virtual machines. Other forms include:

Virtual servers: Multiple server environments created from one physical server
Virtual networks: Software-based networks that improve resource usage and flexibility
Storage virtualization: Combining multiple storage devices into a single virtual storage system

These technologies help organizations use hardware resources more effectively while improving scalability and management.










User interface - A program that allows the user to control the functions of the operating system.

Graphical user interface (GUI) - A user interface that uses icons on the screen to manage different tasks on the computer.

Basic GUI components:
Start menu
Task bar
Desktop with icons and shortcuts



Command-line interface (CLI) - A text-based user interface that use commands to interact with the computer.








CLI vs GUI

Computers can be interacted with through different types of user interfaces. Two of the most common are the Graphical User Interface (GUI) and the Command-Line Interface (CLI).

A GUI allows users to interact with the computer using graphical elements such as icons, buttons, and menus.
A CLI is a text-based interface where users type commands to communicate with the system.

Both interfaces are important in computing and cybersecurity, and each has its own strengths.

Display Differences

One major difference between a GUI and a CLI is how they appear to users.

Graphical User Interface (GUI)

A GUI includes visual components such as:

Icons
Windows
Menus
Toolbars

Examples include desktop environments where users click icons to open applications or manage files.

GUIs are designed to be visually friendly and easier for beginners to navigate.

Command-Line Interface (CLI)

A CLI contains only text. Users interact with the system by entering commands into a terminal or command prompt.

Instead of clicking buttons, users type instructions directly for the operating system to execute.

The interface often resembles programming code because it displays lines of text-based commands and outputs.

Functional Differences

GUIs and CLIs also differ in how tasks are performed.

GUI Functionality

A GUI generally handles one action at a time through visual interaction. Users complete tasks step-by-step by clicking through menus or windows.

For example:

Opening folders
Dragging files
Clicking application icons

This makes GUIs convenient for everyday tasks and beginner users.

CLI Functionality

A CLI allows users to perform multiple operations quickly using commands. Complex tasks can often be automated or combined into a single command.

This makes CLIs especially powerful for system administration, scripting, and cybersecurity operations.

Advantages of CLI in Cybersecurity

Cybersecurity professionals commonly use both GUIs and CLIs, but the CLI offers several important advantages.

Efficiency

Experienced users can often work faster in a CLI because commands allow direct interaction with the operating system.

For example, creating many files through a GUI may require repeating the same steps multiple times. In a CLI, a single command can complete the task instantly.

CLIs are also useful for:

Automating repetitive tasks
Managing systems remotely
Running scripts
Processing large amounts of data quickly
Command History

One major benefit of a CLI is the ability to maintain a history file that records previously executed commands.

This is particularly valuable in cybersecurity because analysts can:

Review the exact steps they performed
Verify procedures during incident response
Troubleshoot mistakes
Audit system activity

For example, when following an incident response playbook, analysts can check command history to confirm that all required commands were executed correctly.

Command history may also help investigators track suspicious or malicious actions if a system has been compromised.

Choosing Between CLI and GUI

The choice between a GUI and CLI often depends on the task and the user’s experience level.

GUIs are generally easier for beginners and casual users.
CLIs provide greater speed, flexibility, and control for advanced tasks.

In cybersecurity and system administration, learning both interfaces is important because each is useful in different situations.







Application: Software designed to carry out a particular function or task for the user.
Basic Input/Output System (BIOS): Firmware found in older computers that initializes hardware and starts the boot process.
Bootloader: A program responsible for loading and starting the operating system during system startup.
Command-Line Interface (CLI): A text-based environment where users interact with the system by entering commands.
Graphical User Interface (GUI): A visual interface that allows users to interact with the computer through icons, menus, and windows.
Hardware: The tangible physical parts of a computer system, such as the CPU, keyboard, monitor, and storage devices.
Legacy Operating System: An older operating system that continues to be used despite no longer being current or fully supported.
Operating System (OS): Core system software that manages hardware resources and enables communication between the user, applications, and hardware.
Random Access Memory (RAM): Temporary memory used by a computer to store data and programs currently in use.
Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI): Modern firmware that replaces BIOS and manages hardware startup while providing enhanced security and functionality.
User Interface: The medium through which users communicate and interact with a computer or operating system.
Virtual Machine (VM): A software-based simulation of a physical computer that can run its own operating system and applications independently.













Module 2
Linux - An open-source operating system.


Components of Linux:
User
Applications 
shell
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
Kernel
Hardware


User - The person interacting with a computer.

Application - A program that performs a specific task.

Shell - The command-line interpreter.

File Hierarchy Standard (FHS) - The component of the Linux OS that organizes data.

Kernel - The component of the Linux OS that manages processes and memory.

Hardware - The physical components of the computer.










Linux System Components
User

The user is the individual who interacts with the computer system. Users start, control, and manage tasks on the computer. Linux is known as a multi-user operating system, meaning several users can access and use the same system resources simultaneously.

Applications

Applications are software programs designed to perform specific tasks for users. Some applications, like calculators and calendars, are usually pre-installed on a computer, while others, such as web browsers or email clients, may need to be installed separately.

In Linux, applications are commonly installed using a package manager. A package manager is a utility that helps users install, update, manage, and remove software packages. A package contains software components that work together to create an application.

Shell

The shell acts as the command-line interface between the user and the operating system. It interprets text-based commands entered by the user and communicates them to the kernel for execution.

The shell can be considered a translator between the user and the computer, converting user commands into instructions the system can understand and process.

Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)

The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS) defines how data and directories are organized within the Linux operating system. It determines where files, programs, and system data are stored so the OS can locate them efficiently.

A directory, also called a folder, is used to organize files and other directories. The FHS provides a structured layout for storing and managing data across the system.

Kernel

The kernel is the core component of the Linux operating system. It manages system resources such as processes and memory and serves as the bridge between software applications and hardware.

The Linux kernel is responsible for handling major hardware operations, allocating resources, and ensuring efficient communication between applications and the computer’s physical components.

Hardware

Hardware refers to the physical parts of a computer system. Examples include hard drives, processors, keyboards, and monitors. Hardware is generally divided into two categories: peripheral devices and internal hardware.

Peripheral Devices

Peripheral devices are external hardware components connected to the computer system. These devices are not essential for the computer to function and can usually be added or removed easily.

Examples include:

Monitor
Keyboard
Mouse
Printer
Internal Hardware

Internal hardware consists of the essential components required for a computer to operate. These parts are connected to the motherboard, the main circuit board of the computer.

Key internal hardware components include:

Central Processing Unit (CPU):
The CPU is the primary processor of the computer. It executes instructions from programs and performs general computing tasks.
Random Access Memory (RAM):
RAM provides temporary or short-term memory for the computer. It stores data currently being used by programs and processes. Data in RAM is lost when the computer is turned off.
Hard Drive:
The hard drive is used for long-term storage of files, programs, and operating system data. Unlike RAM, data stored on a hard drive remains available even after the computer is powered off. Some systems may contain multiple hard drives.





Distributions - The different version of Linux.

Parent Distributions:
Red Hat Enterprise Linux (CentOS)
Slackware (SUSE)
Debian (Ubuntu and KALI LINUX)



Penetration test - A simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities in systems, networks, websites, applications, and processes.



Penetration testing tools in Kali Linux:
Metasploit - It can be used to look for and exploit vulnerabilities on machines.

Burp Suite - It is a tool that helps to test for weaknesses in web applications.

John the Ripper - A tool used to guess passwords.

Digital forensics - The practice of collecting and analyzing data to determine what has happened after an attack.


Digital forensics tools in KALI LINUX:
tcpdump - A command-line packet analyzer. It's used to capture network traffic.
Wireshark - It has GUI that can be used to analyze live and captured network traffic.
Autopsy - It is a forensic tool used to analyze hard drives and smartphones.








Popular Linux Distributions Used in Cybersecurity
Kali Linux

Kali Linux is a widely recognized open-source Linux distribution commonly used by cybersecurity professionals. It is specifically designed for security-related tasks and comes with a large collection of pre-installed tools for activities such as penetration testing and digital forensics.

Penetration testing involves simulating cyberattacks to discover weaknesses in systems, applications, or networks before real attackers can exploit them. Digital forensics focuses on gathering and examining digital evidence after a security incident to understand what occurred.

Although Kali Linux is very popular in cybersecurity, it is not the only Linux distribution used in the field.

Ubuntu

Ubuntu is a beginner-friendly and widely adopted Linux distribution used across many industries, including cybersecurity. It offers both a graphical user interface (GUI) and a command-line interface (CLI), making it suitable for both new and experienced users.

Ubuntu is based on Debian and includes several essential applications by default. Additional software, including security tools, can be installed through its package management system. Due to its large user community, Ubuntu has extensive online documentation and support resources.

Ubuntu is also commonly used in cloud computing environments, which makes it important for cybersecurity professionals working with cloud infrastructure and servers.

Parrot OS

Parrot OS is another open-source Linux distribution designed for cybersecurity and privacy-focused tasks. Similar to Kali Linux, it includes many built-in tools for penetration testing, ethical hacking, and digital investigations.

Parrot OS is known for being lightweight and user-friendly. It supports both GUI and CLI environments, allowing users to choose how they prefer to interact with the system.

Red Hat Enterprise Linux

Red Hat Enterprise Linux, often called RHEL, is a commercial Linux distribution developed for enterprise and business environments. Unlike many open-source distributions, it requires a paid subscription.

RHEL is valued for its stability, security, and professional support services. Organizations often use it in corporate environments where reliability and dedicated technical assistance are important.

AlmaLinux

AlmaLinux is a free, community-supported Linux distribution created to serve as an alternative to CentOS after CentOS 8 reached end-of-life.

AlmaLinux is designed to maintain compatibility with systems previously running CentOS, allowing organizations to continue using their existing applications and configurations with minimal changes. It is commonly used in servers and enterprise environments that require long-term stability.









Introduction to Package Managers
What is a Package?

A package is a collection of software files used to install and run applications on a Linux system. Some packages work together with other packages to create a complete application, while others may function independently as standalone software.

Packages usually include important components such as program files, configuration files, and dependencies. Dependencies are additional libraries or supporting files required for the application to work correctly.

What is a Package Manager?

A package manager is a utility that helps users install, update, manage, and remove software packages from a system. It simplifies software management by automatically handling dependencies and ensuring that required files are installed properly.

Using updated package versions is important because newer releases often contain security patches, performance improvements, and bug fixes that help protect the system.

Types of Package Managers

Different Linux distributions use different package management systems. Many Linux distributions are based on parent distributions, which determines the package manager they support.

For example:

Kali Linux, Ubuntu, and Parrot OS are based on Debian.
CentOS and other similar distributions are derived from Red Hat.

Because of this relationship, Debian-based systems commonly use package managers such as dpkg, while Red Hat-based systems use RPM.

Debian Package Manager (dpkg)

dpkg is a package manager used in Debian-based Linux distributions. It works with software packages that use the .deb file format.

Example format:

Package_Version-Release_Architecture.deb
Red Hat Package Manager (RPM)

RPM is used in Red Hat-based Linux distributions. It manages packages with the .rpm file extension.

Example format:

Package-Version-Release_Architecture.rpm
Package Management Tools

In addition to package managers, Linux also provides package management tools that make software management easier through the command-line interface.

These tools simplify tasks such as:

Installing software
Updating packages
Searching repositories
Removing applications
Advanced Package Tool (APT)

APT is a command-line package management tool used on Debian-based distributions. It works together with dpkg to install, update, search, and manage packages efficiently.

APT is commonly used on systems like:

Ubuntu
Kali Linux
Parrot OS
Yellowdog Updater Modified (YUM)

YUM is a package management tool designed for Red Hat-based Linux distributions. It helps users manage .rpm packages through the command line.

YUM can:

Install packages
Update software
Search repositories
Resolve dependencies automatically

It is commonly used in Red Hat-related distributions and enterprise environments.








command - An instruction telling the computer to do something.







Communicating Through a Shell

A shell is a command-line interface that allows users to interact with the operating system. It works as a bridge between the user and the computer by interpreting commands and sending them to the system for execution.

When a user enters a command, the shell processes the instruction, communicates with the kernel, and then displays the result back to the user. This makes the shell an essential component for managing and controlling Linux systems.

Common Types of Linux Shells

Linux provides several types of shells, each with its own features and functionality. Some commonly used shells include:

Bourne-Again Shell (bash)
C Shell (csh)
Korn Shell (ksh)
Enhanced C Shell (tcsh)
Z Shell (zsh)

Although these shells support many standard Linux commands, they differ in syntax, customization options, and advanced features.

For example:

bash and ksh typically use the dollar sign ($) as the command prompt.
zsh often uses the percent sign (%) as the prompt symbol.
Bash Shell

Bash, short for Bourne-Again Shell, is the default shell for most Linux distributions. It is widely preferred because of its simplicity, flexibility, and user-friendly design.

Bash supports:

Basic Linux commands
Shell scripting
Automation tasks
System administration activities

It is also one of the most commonly used shells in cybersecurity and system administration, making it an important tool for learning Linux and security operations.










Standard input - Information received by the OS via the command line.

Echo - A Linux command that outputs a specified string of text.

String data - Data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters.

Standard output - Information returned by the OS through the shell.

Standard error - Error messages returned by the OS through the shell.










Linux and Cybersecurity Terms
Application: Software designed to carry out a particular function or task.
Bash: Bash The standard shell used in most Linux operating systems.
CentOS: CentOS A free Linux distribution developed using source code from Red Hat Enterprise Linux.
Central Processing Unit (CPU): The main processor of a computer responsible for executing instructions and handling processing tasks.
Command: An instruction entered by a user to tell the computer to perform a specific action.
Digital Forensics: The process of collecting, examining, and interpreting digital evidence after a cybersecurity incident or attack.
Directory: A container used to organize and store files and other directories within a filesystem.
Distributions: Different versions or variants of the Linux operating system.
File Path: The exact location of a file or directory within a filesystem.
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS): The Linux standard that defines how directories and files are organized within the operating system.
Graphical User Interface (GUI): A visual interface that allows users to interact with a computer through icons, windows, and menus.
Hard Drive: A storage device used for saving data and programs permanently.
Hardware: The physical parts and components of a computer system.
Internal Hardware: Essential hardware components located inside the computer that are required for operation.
Kali Linux: Kali Linux A Linux distribution widely used for cybersecurity tasks such as penetration testing and digital forensics.
Kernel: The central component of the Linux operating system that manages hardware resources, memory, and system processes.
Linux: Linux An open-source operating system commonly used in servers, development, and cybersecurity.
Package: A collection of software files used to install and run an application.
Package Manager: A utility that helps users install, update, manage, and remove software packages.
Parrot OS: Parrot OS A Linux distribution focused on security, privacy, and penetration testing.
Penetration Test (Pen Test): A controlled cybersecurity assessment that simulates attacks to identify vulnerabilities in systems or networks.
Peripheral Devices: External hardware devices connected to a computer, such as keyboards, printers, or monitors.
Random Access Memory (RAM): Temporary memory used by the computer to store active data and running processes.
Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL): Red Hat Enterprise Linux A commercial Linux distribution designed for enterprise and business environments.
Shell: A command-line interpreter that allows users to communicate with the operating system.
Standard Error (stderr): Error messages generated by the operating system and displayed through the shell.
Standard Input (stdin): Data or information provided to the operating system through the command line.
Standard Output (stdout): Information or results returned by the operating system through the shell.
String Data: Data made up of a sequence of characters such as letters, numbers, or symbols.
Ubuntu: Ubuntu A popular and beginner-friendly Linux distribution used in many environments, including cybersecurity and cloud computing.
User: The individual who interacts with and operates a computer system.













module 3
Argument(Linux) - Specific information needed by a command.


Root directory - The highest-level directory in Linux.


pwd - Prints the working directory onto the screen.
ls - Displays the names of files and directories in the current working directory.
cd - Navigates between directories.
cat - Displays the content of a file.
head - Displays just the beginning of a file, by default 10 lines.









Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)

The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS) defines how files and directories are arranged in a Linux operating system. It provides a structured layout so users and programs know where important system files, user data, applications, and temporary files are stored.

Linux organizes files in a hierarchical structure that begins from the root directory and branches into multiple subdirectories.

File Paths in Linux

A file path identifies the location of a file or directory in the system. Different levels in the hierarchy are separated using a forward slash (/).

Example:

/home/analyst/projects

This path points to the projects directory inside the analyst user's home folder.

Root Directory

The root directory is the top-level directory in Linux and is represented by:

/

Every other directory in the system originates from this root location.

Common FHS Directories

Below the root directory are several standard directories used for specific purposes.

/home

Stores personal directories for each user.

Example:

/home/analyst

Each user can keep files, documents, and personal projects inside their own home folder.

/bin

Contains executable programs and essential command files required by the system.

These binaries allow Linux to perform basic operations and run commands.

/etc

Stores system configuration files and settings used by applications and services.

/tmp

Used for temporary files created by programs and processes.

Because many users and applications can access this directory, it can sometimes become a target for malicious activity.

/mnt

Used for mounted storage devices such as:

USB drives
External hard disks
Other removable media
Learn More About FHS

You can read more about the filesystem hierarchy using:

man hier
User-Specific Directories

Inside /home, every user has their own personal directory.

Example:

/home/analyst
/home/analyst2

Users may create subdirectories such as:

projects
logs
reports
Using the Tilde (~)

The tilde symbol represents the current user’s home directory.

Example:

/home/analyst/logs

can also be written as:

~/logs
Absolute vs Relative File Paths
Absolute Path

An absolute path begins from the root directory (/) and shows the complete location.

Example:

/home/analyst/projects
Relative Path

A relative path starts from the current working directory instead of the root.

Example:

../projects

Special symbols:

Symbol	Meaning
.	Current directory
..	Parent directory
Important Linux Navigation Commands
pwd

Displays the current working directory.

Example:

pwd

Possible output:

/home/analyst
whoami

Displays the username of the current logged-in user.

Example:

whoami

Possible output:

analyst
ls

Lists files and directories in the current location.

Example:

ls

You can also view contents of another directory:

ls /home/analyst/projects

or

ls projects
cd

Changes the current directory.

Move into a subdirectory:

cd projects

Move using an absolute path:

cd /home/analyst/logs

Move one level upward:

cd ..
Commands for Viewing File Contents
cat

Displays the complete contents of a file.

Example:

cat updates.txt
head

Shows the beginning section of a file.

By default, it displays the first 10 lines.

Example:

head updates.txt

Display a specific number of lines:

head -n 5 updates.txt
tail

Shows the end portion of a file.

By default, it displays the last 10 lines.

Example:

tail updates.txt

This command is especially useful for checking recent log entries.

less

Opens a file one page at a time for easier reading and navigation.

Example:

less updates.txt

Useful keyboard controls inside less:

Key	Function
Spacebar	Next page
b	Previous page
Down Arrow	Move down one line
Up Arrow	Move up one line
q	Exit the viewer










grep - Searches a specified file and returns all lines in the file containing a specified string.
| (piping) - Sends a standard output of one command as standard input to another command for further processing.







Filtering Information in Linux

Filtering helps security analysts quickly locate important information by narrowing results based on specific conditions. Instead of manually checking every file, filtering allows users to search using criteria such as keywords, filenames, extensions, or modification times.

For example, if malware only affected .txt files, filtering could help identify those files much faster.

Using grep

The grep command searches through files and displays lines that contain a specific word or text pattern.

Basic syntax:

grep "search_term" filename

Example:

grep OS updates.txt

This command searches the updates.txt file and displays every line containing the word OS.

Another Example
grep error time_logs.txt

Explanation:

grep → command used for searching
error → keyword being searched
time_logs.txt → file being scanned

The output will show only the lines in the file that contain the word error.

Piping in Linux

Piping is done using the pipe symbol:

|

A pipe transfers the output of one command directly into another command as input.

This allows multiple commands to work together efficiently.

Example of Piping with grep
ls /home/analyst/reports | grep users

How it works:

ls /home/analyst/reports
Lists all files and directories inside the reports directory.
|
Sends that output to another command.
grep users
Filters the results and displays only names containing the word users.
Why Piping Is Useful

Piping is commonly used to:

Filter command results
Process large outputs
Combine commands together
Simplify searches

It is a flexible Linux feature that helps automate tasks and improve efficiency.

Using find

The find command searches for files and directories that match specific conditions.

Basic syntax:

find [starting_directory] [criteria]

Example:

find /home/analyst/projects

This command searches everything inside the projects directory and its subdirectories.

Without search criteria, find may return a very large amount of data.

Common find Options
-name

Searches for names that exactly match a pattern and is case-sensitive.

Example:

find /home/analyst/projects -name "*log*"

This searches for files or directories containing log in their names.

Examples matched:

systemlog.txt
logs
errorlog.csv

Examples NOT matched:

LogFile.txt
LOGS

because -name distinguishes uppercase and lowercase letters.

-iname

Works like -name but ignores letter casing.

Example:

find /home/analyst/projects -iname "*log*"

This command matches:

log
Log
LOG
LoG
Wildcards in Searches

The asterisk (*) acts as a wildcard representing zero or more unknown characters.

Example:

"*log*"

This means:

Anything before log
Anything after log
Or both
Finding Recently Modified Files
-mtime

The -mtime option searches based on when files were last modified.

Example:

find /home/analyst/projects -mtime -3

This displays files modified within the last 3 days.

Time-Based Examples
Command	Meaning
-mtime -1	Modified less than 1 day ago
-mtime +1	Modified more than 1 day ago
-mtime -7	Modified within the last 7 days
Searching by Minutes

Instead of days, Linux can also search using minutes with -mmin.

Example:

find /home/analyst/projects -mmin -30

This returns files modified within the last 30 minutes.

Summary

Linux filtering commands help security analysts quickly locate important information.

Important tools include:

Command	Purpose
grep	Searches file contents for specific text
`	` (pipe)
find	Searches for files and directories
-name	Case-sensitive filename search
-iname	Case-insensitive filename search
-mtime	Search based on modification time
-mmin	Search based on modification time in minutes

These commands are essential for log analysis, incident response, file management, and system investigations in Linux environments.









mkdir - Creates a new directory.
rmdir - Removes, or deletes, a directory.
touch - Creates a new file.
rm - Removes, or deletes, a file.
mv - Moves a file or directory to a new location.
cp - Copies a file or directory into a new location.








Creating and Managing Directories in Linux

Linux provides several commands for creating, deleting, moving, and editing directories and files. These commands are essential for system administration, file management, and cybersecurity tasks.

Creating Directories with mkdir

The mkdir command is used to create new directories.

Basic syntax:

mkdir directory_name

You can create directories using either:

Absolute paths (starting from /)
Relative paths (starting from the current directory)
Example Using an Absolute Path
mkdir /home/analyst/logs/network

This creates a new directory named network inside /home/analyst/logs.

Example Using a Relative Path

If your current directory is already:

/home/analyst/logs

you can simply run:

mkdir network
Verify Directory Creation

Use the ls command to confirm the directory was created:

ls
Removing Directories with rmdir

The rmdir command deletes empty directories.

Example:

rmdir /home/analyst/logs/network

This removes the network directory.

Important Limitation

rmdir only works on empty directories.

If a directory contains files or subdirectories, Linux returns an error.

Example:

rmdir /home/analyst

This would fail if the directory contains data.

Creating and Deleting Files
Creating Files with touch

The touch command creates a new empty file.

Example:

touch permissions.txt

If your current directory is:

/home/analyst/reports

the file permissions.txt will be created there.

Removing Files with rm

The rm command deletes files.

Example:

rm permissions.txt

This permanently removes the file.

Important Note About rm

Deleted files are not easy to recover, so use this command carefully.

You can verify file creation or deletion using:

ls
Moving and Copying Files
mv Command

The mv command moves files or directories to another location.

Example:

mv permissions.txt /home/analyst/logs

This moves permissions.txt into the logs directory.

After moving, the original file no longer exists in its previous location.

cp Command

The cp command copies files or directories.

Example:

cp permissions.txt /home/analyst/logs

This creates a duplicate copy while keeping the original file unchanged.

Renaming Files with mv

The mv command can also rename files.

Example:

mv permissions.txt perm.txt

This changes the filename from permissions.txt to perm.txt.

Editing Files with nano

nano is a command-line text editor commonly included in Linux distributions. It is beginner-friendly and widely used for editing configuration files and text documents.

Opening an Existing File

Example:

nano permissions.txt

This opens the file for editing.

Creating a New File

Example:

nano authorized_users.txt

If the file does not exist, nano creates it automatically.

Useful Nano Shortcuts
Shortcut	Function
Ctrl + O	Save file
Ctrl + X	Exit nano

When saving, nano asks for confirmation before writing changes.

Other Popular Linux Text Editors

Besides nano, other commonly used editors include:

Vim
Emacs
Standard Output Redirection

Linux allows command output to be redirected into files instead of displaying it on the screen.

Two common operators are:

Operator	Function
>	Overwrites file contents
>>	Appends content to the file
Using echo with Redirection
Append Text with >>

Example:

echo "last updated date" >> permissions.txt

This adds the text to the end of the file without removing existing content.

Overwrite Text with >

Example:

echo "time" > permissions.txt

This replaces all existing file contents with the word time.

Important Note About Redirection

Both > and >> create the file automatically if it does not already exist.

Because > erases previous content, it should be used carefully.



Command	Purpose
mkdir	Create directories
rmdir	Remove empty directories
touch	Create empty files
rm	Delete files
mv	Move or rename files
cp	Copy files
nano	Edit text files
>	Overwrite file contents
>>	Append content to a file











permissions - The type of access granted for a file or directory.
Authorization - The concept of granting access to specific resources in a system.

permissions in Linux:
Read
Write
Execute

owners in Linux:
User
Group
Other

drwxrwxrwx
-rwxrwxrwx

if one of these permissions were missing, there would be a hyphen instead of a letter.

Options - Modify the behavior of the command.

ls -l => Displays permissions to files and directories.
ls -a => Displays hidden files.
ls -la => Displays permissions to files and directories, including hidden files.






chmod - Changes permissions on files and directories.

chmod g+w, o-r access.txt








Understanding Linux File Permissions

Linux uses a permission system to control who can access files and directories and what actions they are allowed to perform. Permissions are displayed as a 10-character string that identifies the file type and access levels for different users.

Types of Permissions

Linux permissions are divided into three main categories:

Permission	Files	Directories
Read (r)	View file contents	View files and subdirectories
Write (w)	Modify file contents	Create or remove files
Execute (x)	Run the file as a program	Enter the directory and access contents
Ownership Categories

Permissions are assigned to three different owner groups:

Owner Type	Description
User (u)	The file owner
Group (g)	Users belonging to the file’s group
Other (o)	All remaining users on the system
Permission String Structure

Linux permissions are shown in a format like:

drwxrwxrwx

Each character position has a specific meaning.

Breaking Down the Permission String
Position	Example Character	Meaning
1	d	File type
2	r	User read permission
3	w	User write permission
4	x	User execute permission
5	r	Group read permission
6	w	Group write permission
7	x	Group execute permission
8	r	Other read permission
9	w	Other write permission
10	x	Other execute permission
File Type Indicators

The first character identifies the type of file.

Symbol	Meaning
d	Directory
-	Regular file

Example:

drwxr-xr-x

This indicates a directory.

Example:

-rw-r--r--

This indicates a regular file.

Viewing Permissions with ls

The ls command can display permission information for files and directories.

ls -a

Displays all files, including hidden files.

Hidden files begin with a dot (.).

Example:

ls -a
ls -l

Displays detailed information including:

Permissions
File owner
Group owner
File size
Last modified time

Example:

ls -l
ls -la

Combines both options:

Detailed listing
Hidden files included

Example:

ls -la
Changing Permissions with chmod

The chmod command modifies file and directory permissions.

Basic syntax:

chmod [permissions] [file]
Adding Permissions

Example:

chmod u+rwx,g+rwx,o+rwx login_sessions.txt

Explanation:

Part	Meaning
u+rwx	Add read, write, and execute permissions for user
g+rwx	Add permissions for group
o+rwx	Add permissions for others

This grants full permissions to everyone.

Removing Permissions

Example:

chmod u-rwx,g-rwx,o-rwx login_sessions.txt

This removes all permissions from all owner groups.

Assigning Exact Permissions with =

The equals sign replaces existing permissions with exactly what is specified.

Example:

chmod u=r,g=r,o=r login_sessions.txt

This sets read-only access for:

User
Group
Others

Any previous write or execute permissions are removed.

Important chmod Symbols
Symbol	Purpose
u	User permissions
g	Group permissions
o	Other permissions
+	Add permissions
-	Remove permissions
=	Assign exact permissions
Multiple Permission Changes

When modifying more than one owner category, separate them with commas.

Correct example:

chmod u+r,g-w,o=r file.txt

Do not include spaces after commas.

Principle of Least Privilege

The principle of least privilege means users should only receive the minimum level of access required to perform their tasks.

Excessive permissions can create security risks.

Example Scenario

Suppose a file named:

bonuses.txt

contains confidential salary information.

The file permissions are:

-rw-rw----

Permission breakdown:

Owner Type	Permissions
User	Read and write
Group	Read and write
Other	No permissions

This means group members can access sensitive information, which violates the principle of least privilege.

Fixing Excessive Permissions

To remove group access:

chmod g-rw bonuses.txt

This removes:

Group read permission
Group write permission

Now only the file owner retains access.

Summary

Linux permissions help control access to files and directories.

Command	Purpose
ls -l	View permissions
ls -la	View permissions including hidden files
chmod	Change permissions

Important concepts include:

Read, write, and execute permissions
User, group, and other ownership
Permission strings
Principle of least privilege

Managing permissions correctly is essential for protecting sensitive data and maintaining secure Linux systems.








Root user (or superuser)
A user with elevated privileges to modify the system.

problems with logging in as root:
Security risks
Irreversible mistakes
Accountability

sudo - Temporarily grants elevated permissions to specific users.
useradd - Adds a user to the system.
userdel - Deletes a user from the system.









Responsible Use of sudo in Linux

Linux uses a permission system to control who can make changes to the system. Some tasks require elevated privileges, usually reserved for the root (superuser) account.

Root User vs sudo
Root User

The root user has full control over the system and can execute any command.

However, logging in directly as root is discouraged because:

Mistakes can damage the system permanently
It is difficult to track which user executed commands
It increases security risks if the account is compromised
sudo (Safer Alternative)

The sudo command (“superuser do”) allows authorized users to run specific commands with elevated privileges.

Example:

sudo command_name
Key Idea:

Instead of becoming root, you temporarily “borrow” root-level access for a single command.

Why sudo is Safer

Using sudo is preferred because:

It limits elevated access to specific commands
It logs who ran each command
It reduces risk of system-wide damage
Access is controlled through a configuration file called the sudoers file
Real-World Analogy

Think of sudo like a master key in a hotel:

Only certain staff receive the key
It grants access to all rooms (system privileges)
If misused or stolen, it can cause major security issues

So only trusted users should have sudo access.

Important Warning

Be careful when copying commands from the internet.

If a command includes sudo, it will run with high privileges and can:

Modify system files
Delete important data
Change user permissions
User Management with sudo

Many administrative tasks require sudo because they affect system users and security.

Creating Users: useradd

The useradd command creates new users.

sudo useradd username

Example:

sudo useradd fgarcia
Adding Groups with useradd
Primary Group (-g)

Sets the main group:

sudo useradd -g security fgarcia
Secondary Groups (-G)

Adds the user to additional groups:

sudo useradd -G finance,admin fgarcia
Modifying Users: usermod

The usermod command changes existing user accounts.

Change Primary Group
sudo usermod -g executive fgarcia
Add to Secondary Groups

Use -a -G to append groups without removing existing ones:

sudo usermod -a -G marketing fgarcia
Important Note:
Without -a, existing groups are replaced
With -a, new groups are added safely
Other Useful usermod Options
Option	Purpose
-d	Change home directory
-l	Change username
-L	Lock user account

Example:

sudo usermod -d /home/garcia_f fgarcia
Deleting Users: userdel

The userdel command removes users from the system.

sudo userdel fgarcia
Remove User + Home Directory
sudo userdel -r fgarcia

This deletes:

User account
Home directory and files

⚠️ This action is usually irreversible without backups.

Alternative to Deleting Users

Instead of deleting a user, you can disable their account:

sudo usermod -L fgarcia

This locks the account but keeps data intact for investigation or reassignment.

Changing Ownership: chown

The chown command changes file or directory ownership.

Change User Owner
sudo chown fgarcia access.txt
Change Group Owner
sudo chown :security access.txt

The colon : indicates that you are changing the group.









man - Displays information on other commands and how they work.
whatis - Displays a description of a command on a single line.
apropos - Searches the manual page description for a specified string.

apropos -a => limited to the most relevant commands.








Linux Community and Support Resources

One of the biggest advantages of Linux is its large and active community. Users from around the world contribute tutorials, troubleshooting guides, forums, and documentation that help both beginners and advanced users solve problems and improve their Linux skills.

Searching online for Linux-related issues is often an effective way to learn how others handled similar situations.

Online Linux Communities

A well-known resource for Linux troubleshooting is the
UNIX and Linux Stack Exchange

This platform allows users to:

Ask technical questions
Share solutions
Discuss Linux topics
Learn from experienced users

Community members vote on answers, so the most accurate and helpful responses usually appear first.

Built-In Linux Help Commands

Linux also includes several built-in commands that provide system help and documentation directly from the terminal.

man Command

The man command displays the manual page for a command.

The word man stands for manual.

Basic syntax:

man command_name

Example:

man chown

This opens a detailed guide for the chown command, including:

Usage
Syntax
Options
Examples

The information shown is called a man page.

Why man Is Useful

man helps users:

Learn unfamiliar commands
Understand command options
Troubleshoot problems
Access documentation without internet access
apropos Command

The apropos command searches command descriptions for specific keywords.

This is helpful when:

You don’t remember an exact command
You want commands related to a certain topic

Basic syntax:

apropos keyword

Example:

apropos editor

This displays commands related to editors.

Searching Multiple Words

Use the -a option to search for descriptions containing multiple keywords.

Example:

apropos -a graph editor

This searches for entries containing both:

graph
editor
whatis Command

The whatis command provides a short one-line description of a command.

Basic syntax:

whatis command_name

Example:

whatis nano

Possible output:

nano - simple text editor
Why whatis Is Useful

whatis is useful when you need:

A quick reminder
A short explanation
A fast overview of an unfamiliar command

Unlike man, it does not provide detailed documentation.









Linux Key Terms and Definitions
Term			Reframed Definition
Absolute file path	The complete location of a file or directory starting from the root directory (/).
Argument (Linux)	Extra information provided with a command to specify what the command should act on.
Authentication		The process of confirming a user’s identity before granting access.
Authorization		The process of determining what resources or actions a user is allowed to access.
Bash			A commonly used Linux shell that allows users to interact with the operating system through commands.
Command			An instruction entered into the terminal to make the system perform a task.
File path		The location of a file or directory within the Linux filesystem.
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS)	The Linux directory structure that organizes files and system data in a standard 					layout.
Filtering		The process of narrowing down data to show only information matching specific conditions.
nano			A simple command-line text editor available in many Linux systems.
Options			Special flags or inputs that change how a command behaves. Usually begin with a hyphen (-).
Permissions		Access rights that control who can read, write, or execute files and directories.
Principle of least privilege	A security practice where users receive only the minimum access required to perform their 				tasks.
Relative file path	A file path that begins from the current working directory instead of the root directory.
Root directory		The top-level directory in Linux represented by a forward slash (/).
Root user (superuser)	A privileged account with complete control over the Linux system.
Standard input		Data or information provided to the operating system through the command line or another command.
Standard output		Information or results returned by the operating system to the terminal or shell.














module 4
Database - An organized collection of information or data.


spreadsheets:
Designed for a single user or a small team
Store less data

Databases:
Accessed by multiple people simultaneously 
Store massive amounts of data
perform complex tasks while accessing data


Relational database - A structured database containing tables that are related to each other.

Primary key - A column where every row has a unique entry.
Foreign key - A column in a table that is a primary in another table.


A table can have one primary key but multiple foreign keys.




SQL (Structured Query Language) - A programming language used to create, interact with, and request information from a database.


Query - A request for data from a database table or a combination of tables.









Accessing SQL and Comparing It with Linux Filtering
Accessing SQL

There are different ways to access SQL, depending on the database system being used. One common method is through the Linux command line.

To open a SQL environment from Linux, you enter the command associated with the SQL version you want to use. For example, to access SQLite, you would type:

sqlite3

Once the SQL interface opens, the commands you enter are interpreted as SQL commands instead of Linux shell commands.

Differences Between Linux and SQL Filtering

Both Linux and SQL can filter and search data, but they are designed for different purposes and work in different ways.

Purpose
Linux

Linux filtering is mainly used for working with files, directories, and system data. It helps users:

Search for files
View or modify file contents
Manage permissions
Monitor processes

Common Linux filtering commands include:

find
grep
sed
cut
SQL

SQL filtering is designed for working with databases. It allows users to:

Retrieve specific records
Query tables
Analyze structured data
Manipulate database information

Common SQL keywords include:

SELECT
WHERE
JOIN
Syntax
Linux Syntax

Linux uses different commands and options depending on the task being performed. Each command has its own syntax and behavior.

Example:

grep "error" logfile.txt
SQL Syntax

SQL uses a standardized query language with consistent keywords and clauses across most database systems.

Example:

SELECT * FROM employees
WHERE department = 'IT';
Structure of Data

One major difference between Linux and SQL is how data is organized.

Linux

Linux often displays information as plain text lines. Data is less structured and may require additional commands to isolate specific details.

SQL

SQL stores information in organized tables with rows and columns, making it easier to:

Read data
Filter specific fields
Sort information
Analyze records efficiently

For example, employee login records in SQL could be separated into columns such as:

Employee ID	Username	Login Time	Status

This structured format makes searching and analysis much faster compared to plain-text logs in Linux.

Joining Tables

SQL provides the ability to combine information from multiple tables using joins.

Example:

SELECT employees.name, logins.time
FROM employees
JOIN logins
ON employees.id = logins.employee_id;

This is extremely useful in cybersecurity when analysts need to connect related information from different datasets.

Linux does not have built-in relational table joining like SQL databases do, which limits its ability to correlate structured data.

Best Uses in Cybersecurity
When to Use SQL

SQL is best when:

Data is stored in databases
Information is highly structured
Multiple tables need to be connected
Large datasets require efficient searching and analysis

Examples:

Authentication logs in databases
User activity records
Security event management systems
When to Use Linux Filtering

Linux filtering is useful when:

Data is stored in plain text files
Logs are outside a database system
Quick command-line analysis is needed
Working directly with operating system files

Examples:

System logs
Application log files
Configuration files
Summary
Linux filtering is ideal for working with files and plain-text system data.
SQL filtering is designed for structured database analysis.
SQL provides better organization and supports joining tables.
Linux remains important for analyzing text-based logs and system-level data.
Cybersecurity professionals often use both tools depending on the format and location of the data.








SQL queries:

SELECT - Indicates which columns to return.
FROM - Indicates which table to query.


Syntax - The rules that determine what is correctly structured in a computing language.









Basic SQL Query

SQL queries are used to retrieve information from a database. The two most important keywords in almost every SQL query are:

SELECT
FROM

These keywords tell SQL:

What data to retrieve
Which table to retrieve it from
Example of a Basic SQL Query
SELECT employee_id, device_id
FROM employees;

This query retrieves the employee_id and device_id columns from the employees table.

The Chinook Database

In many SQL exercises, a sample database called the Chinook database is used. It represents a digital media company and contains multiple tables such as:

employees
customers
invoices

These tables store structured information like:

Names
Addresses
Customer details
Billing information

Example query:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers;

This returns the customerid, city, and country columns from the customers table.

Understanding SELECT

The SELECT keyword specifies which columns should be displayed in the results.

Selecting One Column
SELECT customerid
FROM customers;

This retrieves only the customerid column.

Selecting Multiple Columns

Separate column names with commas:

SELECT customerid, city
FROM customers;

This retrieves both customerid and city.

Selecting All Columns

Use an asterisk (*) to return every column in the table:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

This displays all data from the customers table.

Note: Using SELECT * on very large databases is usually not recommended because it can slow performance and make results difficult to read.

Understanding FROM

The FROM keyword identifies the table being queried.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

Here:

SELECT * → return all columns
FROM customers → retrieve data from the customers table
Using Semicolons

A semicolon (;) marks the end of a SQL query.

Example:

SELECT * FROM customers;
Formatting SQL Queries

SQL queries can be written on:

Multiple lines for readability
A single line for compactness

Both formats work the same way.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

or

SELECT * FROM customers;
ORDER BY

The ORDER BY keyword is used to sort query results.

It organizes records based on one or more columns.

Sorting in Ascending Order

By default, ORDER BY sorts in ascending order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city;

This sorts the records alphabetically by city.

Ascending Order Means:
Numbers → smallest to largest
Text → A to Z
Sorting in Descending Order

Use the DESC keyword to reverse the order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city DESC;

This sorts cities from Z to A.

Descending Order Means:
Numbers → largest to smallest
Text → Z to A
Sorting by Multiple Columns

You can sort using more than one column.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY country, city;

This query:

Sorts records by country
Then sorts matching countries by city

This helps organize large datasets more effectively.








Filtering - Selecting data that match a certain condition.

operator - A symbol or keyword that represents an operation

WHERE - Indicates the condition for a filter.

filter for 'East%' - this will give all the records which starts with East
when searching for patterns, we dont use operator, we use LIKE.


LIKE - Used with WHERE to search for a pattern in a column.

WHERE office LIKE 'EAST%'







example - WHERE

SELECT firstname, lastname, title, email
FROM employees
WHERE title = 'IT Staff';







Wildcards
A wildcard is a special character that can be substituted with any other character. Two of the most useful wildcards are the percentage sign (%) and the underscore (_):

The percentage sign substitutes for any number of other characters. 

The underscore symbol only substitutes for one other character.

These wildcards can be placed after a string, before a string, or in both locations depending on the pattern you’re filtering for.

The following table includes these wildcards applied to the string 'a' and examples of what each pattern would return.

Pattern

Results that could be returned

'a%'

apple123, art, a

'a_'

as, an, a7

'a__' 

ant, add, a1c

'%a'

pizza, Z6ra, a

'_a'

ma, 1a, Ha

'%a%'

Again, back, a

'_a_'

Car, ban, ea7









LIKE - SELECT lastname, firstname, title, email
	FROM employees
	WHERE title LIKE 'IT%';

SELECT firstname,lastname, state, country
FROM customers
WHERE state LIKE 'N_';











more SQL filters


common data types:
String 
Numeric 
Date and Time


String data - Data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters

Numeric data - Data consisting of numbers

Date and Time data - Data representing a date and/or time.


Operators - '=', '>', '<', '<>', '>=', '<=' .

BETWEEN - An operator that filters for numbers or dates within a range.







Comparison operators
In SQL, filtering numeric and date and time data often involves operators. You can use the following operators in your filters to make sure you return only the rows you need:

operator

use

<

less than

>

greater than

=

equal to

<=

less than or equal to

>=

greater than or equal to

<>

not equal to

Note: You can also use != as an alternative operator for not equal to.







Numbers, Dates, and Times in Cybersecurity

Security analysts work with many different types of data, not just text or string data. In cybersecurity, numeric, date, and time data are extremely important for monitoring systems, identifying suspicious activity, and analyzing security events.

Numeric Data in Cybersecurity

Numeric data refers to information represented by numbers. Security analysts regularly analyze numeric values to measure activity, detect anomalies, and track system behavior.

Examples of numeric data include:

Number of login attempts
Count of specific log events
Amount of data transferred from a source
Amount of data received by a destination
Number of failed authentication attempts
Network traffic volume
File sizes and storage usage

Numeric data helps analysts identify unusual patterns, such as:

Sudden spikes in traffic
Excessive failed logins
Unexpected increases in data transfer

These patterns may indicate security threats like brute-force attacks, malware activity, or data exfiltration.

Date and Time Data in Cybersecurity

Date and time data records when events occur. This information is essential for tracking incidents and understanding the sequence of activities in a system.

Common examples include:

Login dates
Login times
Patch installation dates
Connection durations
Event timestamps in logs
File creation or modification times

Most security logs automatically attach timestamps to records, allowing analysts to:

Trace attacks chronologically
Investigate suspicious activity
Identify when an incident started
Correlate events across systems
Importance of Date and Time Information

Date and time data helps security analysts:

Detect unauthorized access at unusual hours
Monitor system changes over time
Track how long a connection remained active
Verify whether systems were patched on schedule
Investigate incident timelines accurately

For example:

Multiple failed login attempts late at night may indicate an attack attempt.
A long connection duration from an unknown IP address could suggest suspicious activity.
Missing patch dates may reveal vulnerable systems.
Role in Security Analysis

Together, numeric data and date/time data help analysts:

Monitor system performance
Detect threats
Analyze logs efficiently
Investigate incidents
Identify abnormal behavior patterns

These data types are critical for effective cybersecurity monitoring and incident response.









Incorporating operators into filters
These comparison operators are used in the WHERE clause at the end of a query. The following query uses the > operator to filter the birthdate column. You can run this query to explore its output:


SELECT firstname, lastname, birthdate
FROM employees
WHERE birthdate > '1970-01-01';

+-----------+----------+---------------------+
| FirstName | LastName | BirthDate           |
+-----------+----------+---------------------+
| Jane      | Peacock  | 1973-08-29 00:00:00 |
| Michael   | Mitchell | 1973-07-01 00:00:00 |
| Robert    | King     | 1970-05-29 00:00:00 |
+-----------+----------+---------------------+
This query returns the first and last names of employees born after, but not on, '1970-01-01' (or January 1, 1970). If you were to use the >= operator instead, the results would also include results on exactly '1970-01-01'.

In other words, the > operator is exclusive and the >= operator is inclusive.  An exclusive operator is an operator that does not include the value of comparison. An inclusive operator is an operator that includes the value of comparison. 











BETWEEN
Another operator used for numeric data as well as date and time data is the BETWEEN operator. BETWEEN filters for numbers or dates within a range. For example, if you want to find the first and last names of all employees hired between January 1, 2002 and January 1, 2003, you can use the BETWEEN operator as follows:


SELECT firstname, lastname, hiredate
FROM employees
WHERE hiredate BETWEEN '2002-01-01' AND '2003-01-01';

+-----------+----------+---------------------+
| FirstName | LastName | HireDate            |
+-----------+----------+---------------------+
| Andrew    | Adams    | 2002-08-14 00:00:00 |
| Nancy     | Edwards  | 2002-05-01 00:00:00 |
| Jane      | Peacock  | 2002-04-01 00:00:00 |
+-----------+----------+---------------------+

Note: The BETWEEN operator is inclusive. This means records with a hiredate of January 1, 2002 or January 1, 2003 are included in the results of the previous query.












AND - specifies that both conditions must be met simultaneously.
OR - specifies that either condition can be met.
NOT - Negates a condition.











Accessing SQL
There are many interfaces for accessing SQL and many different versions of SQL. One way to access SQL is through the Linux command line.

To access SQL from Linux, you need to type in a command for the version of SQL that you want to use. For example, if you want to access SQLite, you can enter the command sqlite3 in the command line.

After this, any commands typed in the command line will be directed to SQL instead of Linux commands.

Differences between Linux and SQL filtering 
Although both Linux and SQL allow you to filter through data, there are some differences that affect which one you should choose.

Purpose
Linux filters data in the context of files and directories on a computer system. It’s used for tasks like searching for specific files, manipulating file permissions, or managing processes. 

SQL is used to filter data within a database management system. It’s used for querying and manipulating data stored in tables and retrieving specific information based on defined criteria. 

Syntax
Linux uses various commands and command-line options specific to each filtering tool. Syntax varies depending on the tool and purpose. Some examples of Linux commands are find, sed, cut, e grep

SQL uses the Structured Query Language (SQL), a standardized language with specific keywords and clauses for filtering data across different SQL databases. Some examples of SQL keywords and clauses are WHERE, SELECT, JOIN

Structure
SQL offers a lot more structure than Linux, which is more free-form and not as tidy.

For example, if you wanted to access a log of employee log-in attempts, SQL would have each record separated into columns. Linux would print the data as a line of text without this organization. As a result, selecting a specific column to analyze would be easier and more efficient in SQL.

In terms of structure, SQL provides results that are more easily readable and that can be adjusted more quickly than when using Linux.

Joining tables
Some security-related decisions require information from different tables. SQL allows the analyst to join multiple tables together when returning data. Linux doesn’t have that same functionality; it doesn’t allow data to be connected to other information on your computer. This is more restrictive for an analyst going through security logs.

Best uses
As a security analyst, it’s important to understand when you can use which tool. Although SQL has a more organized structure and allows you to join tables, this doesn’t mean that there aren’t situations that would require you to filter data in Linux.

A lot of data used in cybersecurity will be stored in a database format that works with SQL. However, other logs might be in a format that is not compatible with SQL. For instance, if the data is stored in a text file, you cannot search through it with SQL. In those cases, it is useful to know how to filter in Linux. 

reframe
Accessing SQL and Comparing It with Linux Filtering
Accessing SQL

There are different ways to access SQL, depending on the database system being used. One common method is through the Linux command line.

To open a SQL environment from Linux, you enter the command associated with the SQL version you want to use. For example, to access SQLite, you would type:

sqlite3

Once the SQL interface opens, the commands you enter are interpreted as SQL commands instead of Linux shell commands.

Differences Between Linux and SQL Filtering

Both Linux and SQL can filter and search data, but they are designed for different purposes and work in different ways.

Purpose
Linux

Linux filtering is mainly used for working with files, directories, and system data. It helps users:

Search for files
View or modify file contents
Manage permissions
Monitor processes

Common Linux filtering commands include:

find
grep
sed
cut
SQL

SQL filtering is designed for working with databases. It allows users to:

Retrieve specific records
Query tables
Analyze structured data
Manipulate database information

Common SQL keywords include:

SELECT
WHERE
JOIN
Syntax
Linux Syntax

Linux uses different commands and options depending on the task being performed. Each command has its own syntax and behavior.

Example:

grep "error" logfile.txt
SQL Syntax

SQL uses a standardized query language with consistent keywords and clauses across most database systems.

Example:

SELECT * FROM employees
WHERE department = 'IT';
Structure of Data

One major difference between Linux and SQL is how data is organized.

Linux

Linux often displays information as plain text lines. Data is less structured and may require additional commands to isolate specific details.

SQL

SQL stores information in organized tables with rows and columns, making it easier to:

Read data
Filter specific fields
Sort information
Analyze records efficiently

For example, employee login records in SQL could be separated into columns such as:

Employee ID	Username	Login Time	Status

This structured format makes searching and analysis much faster compared to plain-text logs in Linux.

Joining Tables

SQL provides the ability to combine information from multiple tables using joins.

Example:

SELECT employees.name, logins.time
FROM employees
JOIN logins
ON employees.id = logins.employee_id;

This is extremely useful in cybersecurity when analysts need to connect related information from different datasets.

Linux does not have built-in relational table joining like SQL databases do, which limits its ability to correlate structured data.

Best Uses in Cybersecurity
When to Use SQL

SQL is best when:

Data is stored in databases
Information is highly structured
Multiple tables need to be connected
Large datasets require efficient searching and analysis

Examples:

Authentication logs in databases
User activity records
Security event management systems
When to Use Linux Filtering

Linux filtering is useful when:

Data is stored in plain text files
Logs are outside a database system
Quick command-line analysis is needed
Working directly with operating system files

Examples:

System logs
Application log files
Configuration files
Summary
Linux filtering is ideal for working with files and plain-text system data.
SQL filtering is designed for structured database analysis.
SQL provides better organization and supports joining tables.
Linux remains important for analyzing text-based logs and system-level data.
Cybersecurity professionals often use both tools depending on the format and location of the data.
Basic SQL query
There are two essential keywords in any SQL query: SELECT and FROM. You will use these keywords every time you want to query a SQL database. Using them together helps SQL identify what data you need from a database and the table you are returning it from.

The video demonstrated this SQL query:

SELECT employee_id, device_id

FROM employees;

In readings and quizzes, this course uses a sample database called the Chinook database to run queries. The Chinook database includes data that might be created at a digital media company. A security analyst employed by this company might need to query this data.  For example, the database contains eleven tables, including an employees table, a customers table, and an invoices table. These tables include data such as names and addresses.  

As an example, you can run this query to return data from the customers table of the Chinook database:

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers;
 
SELECT
The SELECT keyword indicates which columns to return. For example, you can return the customerid column from the Chinook database with

SELECT customerid

You can also select multiple columns by separating them with a comma. For example, if you want to return both the customerid and city columns, you should write SELECT customerid, city.

If you want to return all columns in a table, you can follow the SELECT keyword with an asterisk (*). The first line in the query will be SELECT *.

Note: Although the tables you're querying in this course are relatively small, using SELECT * may not be advisable when working with large databases and tables; in those cases, the final output may be difficult to understand and might be slow to run. 

FROM
The SELECT keyword always comes with the FROM keyword. FROM indicates which table to query. To use the FROM keyword, you should write it after the SELECT keyword, often on a new line, and follow it with the name of the table you’re querying. If you want to return all columns from the customers table, you can write:

SELECT *

FROM customers;

When you want to end the query here, you put a semicolon (;) at the end to tell SQL that this is the entire query.

Note: Line breaks are not necessary in SQL queries, but are often used to make the query easier to understand. If you prefer, you can also write the previous query on one line as

SELECT * FROM customers;

ORDER BY
Database tables are often very complicated, and this is where other SQL keywords come in handy. ORDER BY is an important keyword for organizing the data you extract from a table.

ORDER BY sequences the records returned by a query based on a specified column or columns. This can be in either ascending or descending order.

Sorting in ascending order
To use the ORDER BY keyword, write it at the end of the query and specify a column to base the sort on. In this example, SQL will return the customerid, city, and country columns from the customers table, and the records will be sequenced by the city column:

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city;
 
The ORDER BY keyword sorts the records based on the column specified after this keyword. By default, as shown in this example, the sequence will be in ascending order. This means

if you choose a column containing numeric data, it sorts the output from the smallest to largest. For example, if sorting on customerid, the ID numbers are sorted from smallest to largest.

if the column contains alphabetic characters, such as in the example with the city column, it orders the records from the beginning of the alphabet to the end. 

Sorting in descending order
You can also use the ORDER BY with the DESC keyword to sort in descending order. The DESC keyword is short for "descending" and tells SQL to sort numbers from largest to smallest, or alphabetically from Z to A. This can be done by following ORDER BY with the DESC keyword. For example, you can run this query to examine how the results differ when DESC is applied: 

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city DESC;
 
Now, cities at the end of the alphabet are listed first.

Sorting based on multiple columns
You can also choose multiple columns to order by. For example, you might first choose the country and then the city column. SQL then sorts the output by country, and for rows with the same country, it sorts them based on city. You can run this to explore how SQL displays this:

reframe
Basic SQL Query

SQL queries are used to retrieve information from a database. The two most important keywords in almost every SQL query are:

SELECT
FROM

These keywords tell SQL:

What data to retrieve
Which table to retrieve it from
Example of a Basic SQL Query
SELECT employee_id, device_id
FROM employees;

This query retrieves the employee_id and device_id columns from the employees table.

The Chinook Database

In many SQL exercises, a sample database called the Chinook database is used. It represents a digital media company and contains multiple tables such as:

employees
customers
invoices

These tables store structured information like:

Names
Addresses
Customer details
Billing information

Example query:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers;

This returns the customerid, city, and country columns from the customers table.

Understanding SELECT

The SELECT keyword specifies which columns should be displayed in the results.

Selecting One Column
SELECT customerid
FROM customers;

This retrieves only the customerid column.

Selecting Multiple Columns

Separate column names with commas:

SELECT customerid, city
FROM customers;

This retrieves both customerid and city.

Selecting All Columns

Use an asterisk (*) to return every column in the table:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

This displays all data from the customers table.

Note: Using SELECT * on very large databases is usually not recommended because it can slow performance and make results difficult to read.

Understanding FROM

The FROM keyword identifies the table being queried.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

Here:

SELECT * → return all columns
FROM customers → retrieve data from the customers table
Using Semicolons

A semicolon (;) marks the end of a SQL query.

Example:

SELECT * FROM customers;
Formatting SQL Queries

SQL queries can be written on:

Multiple lines for readability
A single line for compactness

Both formats work the same way.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

or

SELECT * FROM customers;
ORDER BY

The ORDER BY keyword is used to sort query results.

It organizes records based on one or more columns.

Sorting in Ascending Order

By default, ORDER BY sorts in ascending order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city;

This sorts the records alphabetically by city.

Ascending Order Means:
Numbers → smallest to largest
Text → A to Z
Sorting in Descending Order

Use the DESC keyword to reverse the order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city DESC;

This sorts cities from Z to A.

Descending Order Means:
Numbers → largest to smallest
Text → Z to A
Sorting by Multiple Columns

You can sort using more than one column.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY country, city;

This query:

Sorts records by country
Then sorts matching countries by city

This helps organize large datasets more effectively.

Summary
Important SQL Keywords
Keyword	Purpose
SELECT	Chooses columns to display
FROM	Specifies the table
ORDER BY	Sorts query results
DESC	Sorts in descending order
Key Points
SELECT and FROM are the foundation of SQL queries.
Multiple columns can be selected using commas.
SELECT * returns all columns.
ORDER BY helps organize output data.
Sorting can be ascending or descending.
Multiple columns can be used for advanced sorting.
Numbers, dates, and times in cybersecurity
Security analysts work with more than just string data, or data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters. 

They also frequently work with numeric data, or data consisting of numbers. A few examples of numeric data that you might encounter in your work as a security analyst include:

the number of login attempts

the count of a specific type of log entry

the volume of data being sent from a source

the volume of data being sent to a destination

You'll also encounter date and time data, or data representing a date and/or time. As a first example, logs will generally timestamp every record. Other time and date data might include:

login dates

login times

dates for patches 

the duration of a connection

reframe
Numbers, Dates, and Times in Cybersecurity

Security analysts work with many different types of data, not just text or string data. In cybersecurity, numeric, date, and time data are extremely important for monitoring systems, identifying suspicious activity, and analyzing security events.

Numeric Data in Cybersecurity

Numeric data refers to information represented by numbers. Security analysts regularly analyze numeric values to measure activity, detect anomalies, and track system behavior.

Examples of numeric data include:

Number of login attempts
Count of specific log events
Amount of data transferred from a source
Amount of data received by a destination
Number of failed authentication attempts
Network traffic volume
File sizes and storage usage

Numeric data helps analysts identify unusual patterns, such as:

Sudden spikes in traffic
Excessive failed logins
Unexpected increases in data transfer

These patterns may indicate security threats like brute-force attacks, malware activity, or data exfiltration.

Date and Time Data in Cybersecurity

Date and time data records when events occur. This information is essential for tracking incidents and understanding the sequence of activities in a system.

Common examples include:

Login dates
Login times
Patch installation dates
Connection durations
Event timestamps in logs
File creation or modification times

Most security logs automatically attach timestamps to records, allowing analysts to:

Trace attacks chronologically
Investigate suspicious activity
Identify when an incident started
Correlate events across systems
Importance of Date and Time Information

Date and time data helps security analysts:

Detect unauthorized access at unusual hours
Monitor system changes over time
Track how long a connection remained active
Verify whether systems were patched on schedule
Investigate incident timelines accurately

For example:

Multiple failed login attempts late at night may indicate an attack attempt.
A long connection duration from an unknown IP address could suggest suspicious activity.
Missing patch dates may reveal vulnerable systems.
Role in Security Analysis

Together, numeric data and date/time data help analysts:

Monitor system performance
Detect threats
Analyze logs efficiently
Investigate incidents
Identify abnormal behavior patterns

These data types are critical for effective cybersecurity monitoring and incident response.

Summary
Data Type	Description	Examples
String Data	Text-based information	Usernames, IP addresses
Numeric Data	Information represented by numbers	Login counts, traffic volume
Date and Time Data	Information showing when events occur	Timestamps, login times
Key Takeaways
Cybersecurity analysis involves more than just text data.
Numeric data helps measure and monitor activity.
Date and time data helps track when events occur.
Logs commonly contain timestamps for every event.
These data types are essential for detecting and investigating security incidents.
Logical operators
AND, OR, and NOT allow you to filter your queries to return the specific information that will help you in your work as a security analyst. They are all considered logical operators.

AND 
First, AND is used to filter on two conditions. AND specifies that both conditions must be met simultaneously. 

As an example, a cybersecurity concern might affect only those customer accounts that meet both the condition of being handled by a support representative with an ID of 5 and the condition of being located in the USA. To find the names and emails of those specific customers, you should place the two conditions on either side of the AND operator in the WHERE clause:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country, supportrepid
FROM customers
WHERE supportrepid = 5 AND country = 'USA';

Running this query returns four rows of information about the customers. You can use this information to contact them about the security concern.

OR 
The OR operator also connects two conditions, but OR specifies that either condition can be met. It returns results where the first condition, the second condition, or both are met.

For example, if you are responsible for finding all customers who are either in the USA or Canada so that you can communicate information about a security update, you can use an OR operator to find all the needed records. As the following query demonstrates, you should place the two conditions on either side of the OR operator in the WHERE clause:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA';

The query returns all customers in either the US or Canada.

Note: Even if both conditions are based on the same column, you need to write out both full conditions. For instance, the query in the previous example contains the filter WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA'. 

NOT 
Unlike the previous two operators, the NOT operator only works on a single condition, and not on multiple ones. The NOT operator negates a condition. This means that SQL returns all records that don’t match the condition specified in the query. 

For example, if a cybersecurity issue doesn't affect customers in the USA but might affect those in other countries, you can return all customers who are not in the USA. This would be more efficient than creating individual conditions for all of the other countries. To use the NOT operator for this task, write the following query and place NOT directly after WHERE:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'USA';

SQL returns every entry where the customers are not from the USA.

Pro tip: Another way of finding values that are not equal to a certain value is by using the <> operator or the != operator. For example, WHERE country <> 'USA' and WHERE country != 'USA' are the same filters as WHERE NOT country = 'USA'. 

Combining logical operators
Logical operators can be combined in filters. For example, if you know that both the USA and Canada are not affected by a cybersecurity issue, you can combine operators to return customers in all countries besides these two. In the following query, NOT is placed before the first condition, it's joined to a second condition with AND, and then NOT is also placed before that second condition. You can run it to explore what it returns:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'Canada' AND NOT country = 'USA';

reframe
Logical Operators in SQL

Logical operators are used in SQL to filter data based on specific conditions. They help security analysts retrieve only the records relevant to an investigation or security task.

The three main logical operators are:

AND
OR
NOT

These operators are commonly used with the WHERE clause.

AND Operator

The AND operator combines two conditions and returns results only when both conditions are true.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE condition1 AND condition2;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country, supportrepid
FROM customers
WHERE supportrepid = 5 AND country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who:

Have a support representative ID of 5
AND are located in the USA

Both conditions must be satisfied for a record to appear in the results.

OR Operator

The OR operator returns records when at least one condition is true.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE condition1 OR condition2;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who are:

In Canada
OR in the USA
OR in both conditions if applicable

The result includes all matching records from either country.

Important Note

Even if the same column is used multiple times, each condition must be written completely.

Correct:

WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA'

Incorrect:

WHERE country = 'Canada' OR 'USA'
NOT Operator

The NOT operator reverses a condition. It returns records that do not match the specified condition.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE NOT condition;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns all customers who are not located in the USA.

Alternative “Not Equal To” Operators

Instead of using NOT, SQL also allows:

<>
!=

These operators mean “not equal to.”

Example:

WHERE country <> 'USA'

or

WHERE country != 'USA'

Both produce the same result as:

WHERE NOT country = 'USA'
Combining Logical Operators

Logical operators can be combined to create more advanced filters.

Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'Canada' AND NOT country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who are:

Not in Canada
AND not in the USA

Only customers from other countries are included in the results.

Why Logical Operators Matter in Cybersecurity

Security analysts use logical operators to:

Identify affected users
Filter suspicious login attempts
Investigate unusual activity
Narrow down security logs
Search for specific events efficiently

Examples include:

Finding failed logins from a specific country
Identifying users with multiple suspicious conditions
Excluding trusted systems from results
Summary
Operator	Purpose
AND	Both conditions must be true
OR	At least one condition must be true
NOT	Excludes records matching a condition











INNER JOIN - Returns rows matching on a specified column that exists in more than one table.


Example of an INNER JOIN - 

SELECT username, office, operating_system FROM employees INNER JOIN machines ON employees.employee_id = machines.employee_id;





LEFT JOIN - Returns all of the records of the first table, but only returns rows of the second table that match on a specified column.


RIGHT JOIN - Returns all of the records of the second table, but only returns rows from the first table that match on a specified column.


FULL OUTER JOIN - Returns all records from both tables.











Accessing SQL
There are many interfaces for accessing SQL and many different versions of SQL. One way to access SQL is through the Linux command line.

To access SQL from Linux, you need to type in a command for the version of SQL that you want to use. For example, if you want to access SQLite, you can enter the command sqlite3 in the command line.

After this, any commands typed in the command line will be directed to SQL instead of Linux commands.

Differences between Linux and SQL filtering 
Although both Linux and SQL allow you to filter through data, there are some differences that affect which one you should choose.

Purpose
Linux filters data in the context of files and directories on a computer system. It’s used for tasks like searching for specific files, manipulating file permissions, or managing processes. 

SQL is used to filter data within a database management system. It’s used for querying and manipulating data stored in tables and retrieving specific information based on defined criteria. 

Syntax
Linux uses various commands and command-line options specific to each filtering tool. Syntax varies depending on the tool and purpose. Some examples of Linux commands are find, sed, cut, e grep

SQL uses the Structured Query Language (SQL), a standardized language with specific keywords and clauses for filtering data across different SQL databases. Some examples of SQL keywords and clauses are WHERE, SELECT, JOIN

Structure
SQL offers a lot more structure than Linux, which is more free-form and not as tidy.

For example, if you wanted to access a log of employee log-in attempts, SQL would have each record separated into columns. Linux would print the data as a line of text without this organization. As a result, selecting a specific column to analyze would be easier and more efficient in SQL.

In terms of structure, SQL provides results that are more easily readable and that can be adjusted more quickly than when using Linux.

Joining tables
Some security-related decisions require information from different tables. SQL allows the analyst to join multiple tables together when returning data. Linux doesn’t have that same functionality; it doesn’t allow data to be connected to other information on your computer. This is more restrictive for an analyst going through security logs.

Best uses
As a security analyst, it’s important to understand when you can use which tool. Although SQL has a more organized structure and allows you to join tables, this doesn’t mean that there aren’t situations that would require you to filter data in Linux.

A lot of data used in cybersecurity will be stored in a database format that works with SQL. However, other logs might be in a format that is not compatible with SQL. For instance, if the data is stored in a text file, you cannot search through it with SQL. In those cases, it is useful to know how to filter in Linux. 

reframe
Accessing SQL and Comparing It with Linux Filtering
Accessing SQL

There are different ways to access SQL, depending on the database system being used. One common method is through the Linux command line.

To open a SQL environment from Linux, you enter the command associated with the SQL version you want to use. For example, to access SQLite, you would type:

sqlite3

Once the SQL interface opens, the commands you enter are interpreted as SQL commands instead of Linux shell commands.

Differences Between Linux and SQL Filtering

Both Linux and SQL can filter and search data, but they are designed for different purposes and work in different ways.

Purpose
Linux

Linux filtering is mainly used for working with files, directories, and system data. It helps users:

Search for files
View or modify file contents
Manage permissions
Monitor processes

Common Linux filtering commands include:

find
grep
sed
cut
SQL

SQL filtering is designed for working with databases. It allows users to:

Retrieve specific records
Query tables
Analyze structured data
Manipulate database information

Common SQL keywords include:

SELECT
WHERE
JOIN
Syntax
Linux Syntax

Linux uses different commands and options depending on the task being performed. Each command has its own syntax and behavior.

Example:

grep "error" logfile.txt
SQL Syntax

SQL uses a standardized query language with consistent keywords and clauses across most database systems.

Example:

SELECT * FROM employees
WHERE department = 'IT';
Structure of Data

One major difference between Linux and SQL is how data is organized.

Linux

Linux often displays information as plain text lines. Data is less structured and may require additional commands to isolate specific details.

SQL

SQL stores information in organized tables with rows and columns, making it easier to:

Read data
Filter specific fields
Sort information
Analyze records efficiently

For example, employee login records in SQL could be separated into columns such as:

Employee ID	Username	Login Time	Status

This structured format makes searching and analysis much faster compared to plain-text logs in Linux.

Joining Tables

SQL provides the ability to combine information from multiple tables using joins.

Example:

SELECT employees.name, logins.time
FROM employees
JOIN logins
ON employees.id = logins.employee_id;

This is extremely useful in cybersecurity when analysts need to connect related information from different datasets.

Linux does not have built-in relational table joining like SQL databases do, which limits its ability to correlate structured data.

Best Uses in Cybersecurity
When to Use SQL

SQL is best when:

Data is stored in databases
Information is highly structured
Multiple tables need to be connected
Large datasets require efficient searching and analysis

Examples:

Authentication logs in databases
User activity records
Security event management systems
When to Use Linux Filtering

Linux filtering is useful when:

Data is stored in plain text files
Logs are outside a database system
Quick command-line analysis is needed
Working directly with operating system files

Examples:

System logs
Application log files
Configuration files
Summary
Linux filtering is ideal for working with files and plain-text system data.
SQL filtering is designed for structured database analysis.
SQL provides better organization and supports joining tables.
Linux remains important for analyzing text-based logs and system-level data.
Cybersecurity professionals often use both tools depending on the format and location of the data.
Basic SQL query
There are two essential keywords in any SQL query: SELECT and FROM. You will use these keywords every time you want to query a SQL database. Using them together helps SQL identify what data you need from a database and the table you are returning it from.

The video demonstrated this SQL query:

SELECT employee_id, device_id

FROM employees;

In readings and quizzes, this course uses a sample database called the Chinook database to run queries. The Chinook database includes data that might be created at a digital media company. A security analyst employed by this company might need to query this data.  For example, the database contains eleven tables, including an employees table, a customers table, and an invoices table. These tables include data such as names and addresses.  

As an example, you can run this query to return data from the customers table of the Chinook database:

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers;
 
SELECT
The SELECT keyword indicates which columns to return. For example, you can return the customerid column from the Chinook database with

SELECT customerid

You can also select multiple columns by separating them with a comma. For example, if you want to return both the customerid and city columns, you should write SELECT customerid, city.

If you want to return all columns in a table, you can follow the SELECT keyword with an asterisk (*). The first line in the query will be SELECT *.

Note: Although the tables you're querying in this course are relatively small, using SELECT * may not be advisable when working with large databases and tables; in those cases, the final output may be difficult to understand and might be slow to run. 

FROM
The SELECT keyword always comes with the FROM keyword. FROM indicates which table to query. To use the FROM keyword, you should write it after the SELECT keyword, often on a new line, and follow it with the name of the table you’re querying. If you want to return all columns from the customers table, you can write:

SELECT *

FROM customers;

When you want to end the query here, you put a semicolon (;) at the end to tell SQL that this is the entire query.

Note: Line breaks are not necessary in SQL queries, but are often used to make the query easier to understand. If you prefer, you can also write the previous query on one line as

SELECT * FROM customers;

ORDER BY
Database tables are often very complicated, and this is where other SQL keywords come in handy. ORDER BY is an important keyword for organizing the data you extract from a table.

ORDER BY sequences the records returned by a query based on a specified column or columns. This can be in either ascending or descending order.

Sorting in ascending order
To use the ORDER BY keyword, write it at the end of the query and specify a column to base the sort on. In this example, SQL will return the customerid, city, and country columns from the customers table, and the records will be sequenced by the city column:

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city;
 
The ORDER BY keyword sorts the records based on the column specified after this keyword. By default, as shown in this example, the sequence will be in ascending order. This means

if you choose a column containing numeric data, it sorts the output from the smallest to largest. For example, if sorting on customerid, the ID numbers are sorted from smallest to largest.

if the column contains alphabetic characters, such as in the example with the city column, it orders the records from the beginning of the alphabet to the end. 

Sorting in descending order
You can also use the ORDER BY with the DESC keyword to sort in descending order. The DESC keyword is short for "descending" and tells SQL to sort numbers from largest to smallest, or alphabetically from Z to A. This can be done by following ORDER BY with the DESC keyword. For example, you can run this query to examine how the results differ when DESC is applied: 

 
SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city DESC;
 
Now, cities at the end of the alphabet are listed first.

Sorting based on multiple columns
You can also choose multiple columns to order by. For example, you might first choose the country and then the city column. SQL then sorts the output by country, and for rows with the same country, it sorts them based on city. You can run this to explore how SQL displays this:

reframe
Basic SQL Query

SQL queries are used to retrieve information from a database. The two most important keywords in almost every SQL query are:

SELECT
FROM

These keywords tell SQL:

What data to retrieve
Which table to retrieve it from
Example of a Basic SQL Query
SELECT employee_id, device_id
FROM employees;

This query retrieves the employee_id and device_id columns from the employees table.

The Chinook Database

In many SQL exercises, a sample database called the Chinook database is used. It represents a digital media company and contains multiple tables such as:

employees
customers
invoices

These tables store structured information like:

Names
Addresses
Customer details
Billing information

Example query:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers;

This returns the customerid, city, and country columns from the customers table.

Understanding SELECT

The SELECT keyword specifies which columns should be displayed in the results.

Selecting One Column
SELECT customerid
FROM customers;

This retrieves only the customerid column.

Selecting Multiple Columns

Separate column names with commas:

SELECT customerid, city
FROM customers;

This retrieves both customerid and city.

Selecting All Columns

Use an asterisk (*) to return every column in the table:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

This displays all data from the customers table.

Note: Using SELECT * on very large databases is usually not recommended because it can slow performance and make results difficult to read.

Understanding FROM

The FROM keyword identifies the table being queried.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

Here:

SELECT * → return all columns
FROM customers → retrieve data from the customers table
Using Semicolons

A semicolon (;) marks the end of a SQL query.

Example:

SELECT * FROM customers;
Formatting SQL Queries

SQL queries can be written on:

Multiple lines for readability
A single line for compactness

Both formats work the same way.

Example:

SELECT *
FROM customers;

or

SELECT * FROM customers;
ORDER BY

The ORDER BY keyword is used to sort query results.

It organizes records based on one or more columns.

Sorting in Ascending Order

By default, ORDER BY sorts in ascending order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city;

This sorts the records alphabetically by city.

Ascending Order Means:
Numbers → smallest to largest
Text → A to Z
Sorting in Descending Order

Use the DESC keyword to reverse the order.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY city DESC;

This sorts cities from Z to A.

Descending Order Means:
Numbers → largest to smallest
Text → Z to A
Sorting by Multiple Columns

You can sort using more than one column.

Example:

SELECT customerid, city, country
FROM customers
ORDER BY country, city;

This query:

Sorts records by country
Then sorts matching countries by city

This helps organize large datasets more effectively.

Summary
Important SQL Keywords
Keyword	Purpose
SELECT	Chooses columns to display
FROM	Specifies the table
ORDER BY	Sorts query results
DESC	Sorts in descending order
Key Points
SELECT and FROM are the foundation of SQL queries.
Multiple columns can be selected using commas.
SELECT * returns all columns.
ORDER BY helps organize output data.
Sorting can be ascending or descending.
Multiple columns can be used for advanced sorting.
Numbers, dates, and times in cybersecurity
Security analysts work with more than just string data, or data consisting of an ordered sequence of characters. 

They also frequently work with numeric data, or data consisting of numbers. A few examples of numeric data that you might encounter in your work as a security analyst include:

the number of login attempts

the count of a specific type of log entry

the volume of data being sent from a source

the volume of data being sent to a destination

You'll also encounter date and time data, or data representing a date and/or time. As a first example, logs will generally timestamp every record. Other time and date data might include:

login dates

login times

dates for patches 

the duration of a connection

reframe
Numbers, Dates, and Times in Cybersecurity

Security analysts work with many different types of data, not just text or string data. In cybersecurity, numeric, date, and time data are extremely important for monitoring systems, identifying suspicious activity, and analyzing security events.

Numeric Data in Cybersecurity

Numeric data refers to information represented by numbers. Security analysts regularly analyze numeric values to measure activity, detect anomalies, and track system behavior.

Examples of numeric data include:

Number of login attempts
Count of specific log events
Amount of data transferred from a source
Amount of data received by a destination
Number of failed authentication attempts
Network traffic volume
File sizes and storage usage

Numeric data helps analysts identify unusual patterns, such as:

Sudden spikes in traffic
Excessive failed logins
Unexpected increases in data transfer

These patterns may indicate security threats like brute-force attacks, malware activity, or data exfiltration.

Date and Time Data in Cybersecurity

Date and time data records when events occur. This information is essential for tracking incidents and understanding the sequence of activities in a system.

Common examples include:

Login dates
Login times
Patch installation dates
Connection durations
Event timestamps in logs
File creation or modification times

Most security logs automatically attach timestamps to records, allowing analysts to:

Trace attacks chronologically
Investigate suspicious activity
Identify when an incident started
Correlate events across systems
Importance of Date and Time Information

Date and time data helps security analysts:

Detect unauthorized access at unusual hours
Monitor system changes over time
Track how long a connection remained active
Verify whether systems were patched on schedule
Investigate incident timelines accurately

For example:

Multiple failed login attempts late at night may indicate an attack attempt.
A long connection duration from an unknown IP address could suggest suspicious activity.
Missing patch dates may reveal vulnerable systems.
Role in Security Analysis

Together, numeric data and date/time data help analysts:

Monitor system performance
Detect threats
Analyze logs efficiently
Investigate incidents
Identify abnormal behavior patterns

These data types are critical for effective cybersecurity monitoring and incident response.

Summary
Data Type	Description	Examples
String Data	Text-based information	Usernames, IP addresses
Numeric Data	Information represented by numbers	Login counts, traffic volume
Date and Time Data	Information showing when events occur	Timestamps, login times
Key Takeaways
Cybersecurity analysis involves more than just text data.
Numeric data helps measure and monitor activity.
Date and time data helps track when events occur.
Logs commonly contain timestamps for every event.
These data types are essential for detecting and investigating security incidents.
Logical operators
AND, OR, and NOT allow you to filter your queries to return the specific information that will help you in your work as a security analyst. They are all considered logical operators.

AND 
First, AND is used to filter on two conditions. AND specifies that both conditions must be met simultaneously. 

As an example, a cybersecurity concern might affect only those customer accounts that meet both the condition of being handled by a support representative with an ID of 5 and the condition of being located in the USA. To find the names and emails of those specific customers, you should place the two conditions on either side of the AND operator in the WHERE clause:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country, supportrepid
FROM customers
WHERE supportrepid = 5 AND country = 'USA';

Running this query returns four rows of information about the customers. You can use this information to contact them about the security concern.

OR 
The OR operator also connects two conditions, but OR specifies that either condition can be met. It returns results where the first condition, the second condition, or both are met.

For example, if you are responsible for finding all customers who are either in the USA or Canada so that you can communicate information about a security update, you can use an OR operator to find all the needed records. As the following query demonstrates, you should place the two conditions on either side of the OR operator in the WHERE clause:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA';

The query returns all customers in either the US or Canada.

Note: Even if both conditions are based on the same column, you need to write out both full conditions. For instance, the query in the previous example contains the filter WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA'. 

NOT 
Unlike the previous two operators, the NOT operator only works on a single condition, and not on multiple ones. The NOT operator negates a condition. This means that SQL returns all records that don’t match the condition specified in the query. 

For example, if a cybersecurity issue doesn't affect customers in the USA but might affect those in other countries, you can return all customers who are not in the USA. This would be more efficient than creating individual conditions for all of the other countries. To use the NOT operator for this task, write the following query and place NOT directly after WHERE:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'USA';

SQL returns every entry where the customers are not from the USA.

Pro tip: Another way of finding values that are not equal to a certain value is by using the <> operator or the != operator. For example, WHERE country <> 'USA' and WHERE country != 'USA' are the same filters as WHERE NOT country = 'USA'. 

Combining logical operators
Logical operators can be combined in filters. For example, if you know that both the USA and Canada are not affected by a cybersecurity issue, you can combine operators to return customers in all countries besides these two. In the following query, NOT is placed before the first condition, it's joined to a second condition with AND, and then NOT is also placed before that second condition. You can run it to explore what it returns:


SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'Canada' AND NOT country = 'USA';

reframe
Logical Operators in SQL

Logical operators are used in SQL to filter data based on specific conditions. They help security analysts retrieve only the records relevant to an investigation or security task.

The three main logical operators are:

AND
OR
NOT

These operators are commonly used with the WHERE clause.

AND Operator

The AND operator combines two conditions and returns results only when both conditions are true.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE condition1 AND condition2;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country, supportrepid
FROM customers
WHERE supportrepid = 5 AND country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who:

Have a support representative ID of 5
AND are located in the USA

Both conditions must be satisfied for a record to appear in the results.

OR Operator

The OR operator returns records when at least one condition is true.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE condition1 OR condition2;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who are:

In Canada
OR in the USA
OR in both conditions if applicable

The result includes all matching records from either country.

Important Note

Even if the same column is used multiple times, each condition must be written completely.

Correct:

WHERE country = 'Canada' OR country = 'USA'

Incorrect:

WHERE country = 'Canada' OR 'USA'
NOT Operator

The NOT operator reverses a condition. It returns records that do not match the specified condition.

Syntax
SELECT column_names
FROM table_name
WHERE NOT condition;
Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns all customers who are not located in the USA.

Alternative “Not Equal To” Operators

Instead of using NOT, SQL also allows:

<>
!=

These operators mean “not equal to.”

Example:

WHERE country <> 'USA'

or

WHERE country != 'USA'

Both produce the same result as:

WHERE NOT country = 'USA'
Combining Logical Operators

Logical operators can be combined to create more advanced filters.

Example
SELECT firstname, lastname, email, country
FROM customers
WHERE NOT country = 'Canada' AND NOT country = 'USA';
What This Query Does

This query returns customers who are:

Not in Canada
AND not in the USA

Only customers from other countries are included in the results.

Why Logical Operators Matter in Cybersecurity

Security analysts use logical operators to:

Identify affected users
Filter suspicious login attempts
Investigate unusual activity
Narrow down security logs
Search for specific events efficiently

Examples include:

Finding failed logins from a specific country
Identifying users with multiple suspicious conditions
Excluding trusted systems from results
Summary
Operator	Purpose
AND	Both conditions must be true
OR	At least one condition must be true
NOT	Excludes records matching a condition
Key Takeaways
Logical operators are used with the WHERE clause.
AND narrows results by requiring multiple conditions.
OR broadens results by accepting either condition.
NOT excludes matching records.
Operators can be combined for advanced filtering.
Logical filtering is essential for cybersecurity investigations and log analysis.
Project description
My organization is working to make their system more secure. It is my job to ensure the system
is safe, investigate all potential security issues, and update employee computers as needed.
The following steps provide examples of how I used SQL with filters to perform security-related
tasks.
Retrieve after hours failed login attempts
There was a potential security incident that occurred after business hours (after 18:00). All after
hours login attempts that failed need to be investigated.
The following code demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for failed login attempts
that occurred after business hours.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. This
query filters for failed login attempts that occurred after 18:00. First, I started by selecting all
data from the log_in_attempts table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with an AND operator to
filter my results to output only login attempts that occurred after 18:00 and were unsuccessful.
The first condition is login_time > '18:00', which filters for the login attempts that
occurred after 18:00. The second condition is success = FALSE, which filters for the failed
login attempts.
Retrieve login attempts on specific dates
A suspicious event occurred on 2022-05-09. Any login activity that happened on 2022-05-09
or on the day before needs to be investigated.

The following code demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for login attempts that
occurred on specific dates.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. This
query returns all login attempts that occurred on 2022-05-09 or 2022-05-08. First, I started by
selecting all data from the log_in_attempts table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with an OR
operator to filter my results to output only login attempts that occurred on either 2022-05-09
or 2022-05-08. The first condition is login_date = '2022-05-09', which filters for logins
on 2022-05-09. The second condition is login_date = '2022-05-08', which filters for
logins on 2022-05-08.
Retrieve login attempts outside of Mexico
After investigating the organization’s data on login attempts, I believe there is an issue with the
login attempts that occurred outside of Mexico. These login attempts should be investigated.
The following code demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for login attempts that
occurred outside of Mexico.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. This
query returns all login attempts that occurred in countries other than Mexico. First, I started by
selecting all data from the log_in_attempts table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with NOT to
filter for countries other than Mexico. I used LIKE with MEX% as the pattern to match because
the dataset represents Mexico as MEX and MEXICO. The percentage sign (%) represents any
number of unspecified characters when used with LIKE.

Retrieve employees in Marketing
My team wants to update the computers for certain employees in the Marketing department.
To do this, I have to get information on which employee machines to update.
The following code demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for employee machines
from employees in the Marketing department in the East building.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. This
query returns all employees in the Marketing department in the East building. First, I started by
selecting all data from the employees table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with AND to filter for
employees who work in the Marketing department and in the East building. I used LIKE with
East% as the pattern to match because the data in the office column represents the East
building with the specific office number. The first condition is the department =
'Marketing' portion, which filters for employees in the Marketing department. The second
condition is the office LIKE 'East%' portion, which filters for employees in the East
building.
Retrieve employees in Finance or Sales
The machines for employees in the Finance and Sales departments also need to be updated.
Since a different security update is needed, I have to get information on employees only from
these two departments.
The following code demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for employee machines
from employees in the Finance or Sales departments.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. This
query returns all employees in the Finance and Sales departments. First, I started by selecting
all data from the employees table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with OR to filter for employees
who are in the Finance and Sales departments. I used the OR operator instead of AND because I
want all employees who are in either department. The first condition is department =
'Finance', which filters for employees from the Finance department. The second condition is
department = 'Sales', which filters for employees from the Sales department.
Retrieve all employees not in IT
My team needs to make one more security update on employees who are not in the
Information Technology department. To make the update, I first have to get information on
these employees.
The following demonstrates how I created a SQL query to filter for employee machines from
employees not in the Information Technology department.

The first part of the screenshot is my query, and the second part is a portion of the output. The
query returns all employees not in the Information Technology department. First, I started by
selecting all data from the employees table. Then, I used a WHERE clause with NOT to filter for
employees not in this department.

Summary
I applied filters to SQL queries to get specific information on login attempts and employee
machines. I used two different tables, log_in_attempts and employees. I used the AND,
OR, and NOT operators to filter for the specific information needed for each task. I also used
LIKE and the percentage sign (%) wildcard to filter for patterns.

reframe with headings given
Project Description

My organization is focused on improving system security. As a security analyst, my responsibilities include monitoring potential security threats, investigating suspicious activity, and updating employee systems when necessary.

To complete these tasks, I used SQL queries with filters to retrieve specific information related to login attempts and employee machines.

Retrieve After Hours Failed Login Attempts

A potential security incident occurred after business hours, specifically after 18:00. All failed login attempts during this period needed investigation.

To identify these events, I created a SQL query that filtered for:

Login attempts occurring after 18:00
Unsuccessful login attempts
SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM log_in_attempts
WHERE login_time > '18:00' AND success = FALSE;
Explanation
SELECT * retrieves all columns from the log_in_attempts table.
login_time > '18:00' filters attempts made after business hours.
success = FALSE filters only failed login attempts.
The AND operator ensures both conditions must be true.

This query helped identify suspicious failed access attempts occurring outside normal working hours.

Retrieve Login Attempts on Specific Dates

A suspicious event was detected on 2022-05-09. Login attempts on that date and the previous day required investigation.

SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM log_in_attempts
WHERE login_date = '2022-05-09'
OR login_date = '2022-05-08';
Explanation
The query retrieves all records from the log_in_attempts table.
login_date = '2022-05-09' filters attempts on the suspicious date.
login_date = '2022-05-08' filters attempts from the day before.
The OR operator returns records matching either condition.

This allowed investigation of all login activity surrounding the suspicious event.

Retrieve Login Attempts Outside of Mexico

After reviewing login records, I identified suspicious login attempts originating outside of Mexico.

SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM log_in_attempts
WHERE NOT country LIKE 'MEX%';
Explanation
NOT excludes records matching the condition.
LIKE 'MEX%' matches values beginning with MEX, including:
MEX
MEXICO
% is a wildcard representing any number of characters.

This query returned all login attempts from countries other than Mexico.

Retrieve Employees in Marketing

Employees in the Marketing department located in the East building required system updates.

SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE department = 'Marketing'
AND office LIKE 'East%';
Explanation
department = 'Marketing' filters Marketing employees.
office LIKE 'East%' filters offices located in the East building.
The % wildcard allows matching office numbers such as:
East-101
East-205

The AND operator ensures employees meet both conditions.

Retrieve Employees in Finance or Sales

Employees in the Finance and Sales departments required a separate security update.

SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE department = 'Finance'
OR department = 'Sales';
Explanation
department = 'Finance' filters Finance employees.
department = 'Sales' filters Sales employees.
The OR operator returns employees from either department.

This query helped identify all systems requiring the additional update.

Retrieve All Employees Not in IT

Another update needed to be applied to employees outside the Information Technology department.

SQL Query
SELECT *
FROM employees
WHERE NOT department = 'Information Technology';
Explanation
NOT excludes employees belonging to the Information Technology department.
All remaining employee records are returned.

This allowed the team to identify systems needing the final security update.

Summary

In this project, I used SQL filtering techniques to retrieve specific cybersecurity-related information from the log_in_attempts and employees tables.

The queries involved:

Investigating suspicious login activity
Identifying failed login attempts
Filtering login events by date and country
Retrieving employee systems requiring security updates
SQL Concepts Used
SQL Feature	Purpose
WHERE	Filters records
AND	Requires multiple conditions
OR	Accepts either condition
NOT	Excludes matching records
LIKE	Matches patterns
% Wildcard	Represents unknown characters

These filtering techniques are essential for security monitoring, investigations, and system management in cybersecurity environments.

Inner joins
The first type of join that you might perform is an inner join. INNER JOIN returns rows matching on a specified column that exists in more than one table.

Venn diagram with two circles labeled "left table" and "right table". The intersection is highlighted.
It only returns the rows where there is a match, but like other types of joins, it returns all specified columns from all joined tables. For example, if the query joins two tables with SELECT *, all columns in both of the tables are returned.

Note: If a column exists in both of the tables, it is returned twice when SELECT * is used.

The syntax of an inner join
To write a query using INNER JOIN, you can use the following syntax:

SELECT *

FROM employees

INNER JOIN machines ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

You must specify the two tables to join by including the first or left table after FROM and the second or right table after INNER JOIN.

After the name of the right table, use the ON keyword and the = operator to indicate the column you are joining the tables on. It's important that you specify both the table and column names in this portion of the join by placing a period (.) between the table and the column.  

In addition to selecting all columns, you can select only certain columns.  For example, if you only want the join to return the username, operating_system and device_id columns, you can write this query:

SELECT username, operating_system, employees.device_id

FROM  employees

INNER JOIN machines ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

Note: In the example query, username and operating_system only appear in one of the two tables, so they are written with just the column name. On the other hand, because device_id appears in both tables, it's necessary to indicate which one to return by specifying both the table and column name (employees.device_id).

Outer joins
Outer joins expand what is returned from a join. Each type of outer join returns all rows from either one table or both tables.

Left joins
When joining two tables, LEFT JOIN returns all the records of the first table, but only returns rows of the second table that match on a specified column. 

Venn diagram with two circles labeled "left table" and "right table". The left circle and the intersection are highlighted.
The syntax for using LEFT JOIN is demonstrated in the following query:

SELECT *

FROM employees

LEFT JOIN machines ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

As with all joins, you should specify the first or left table as the table that comes after FROM and the second or right table as the table that comes after LEFT JOIN. In the example query, because employees is the left table, all of its records are returned. Only records that match on the device_id column are returned from the right table, machines. 

Right joins
When joining two tables, RIGHT JOIN returns all of the records of the second table, but only returns rows from the first table that match on a specified column. 

Venn diagram with two circles labeled "left table" and "right table". The right circle and the intersection are highlighted.
The following query demonstrates the syntax for RIGHT JOIN:

SELECT *

FROM employees

RIGHT JOIN machines ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

RIGHT JOIN has the same syntax as LEFT JOIN, with the only difference being the keyword RIGHT JOIN instructs SQL to produce different output. The query returns all records from machines, which is the second or right table. Only matching records are returned from employees, which is the first or left table.

Note:  You can use LEFT JOIN and RIGHT JOIN and return the exact same results if you use the tables in reverse order. The following RIGHT JOIN query returns the exact same result as the LEFT JOIN query demonstrated in the previous section:

SELECT *

FROM machines

RIGHT JOIN employees ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

All that you have to do is switch the order of the tables that appear before and after the keyword used for the join, and you will have swapped the left and right tables.

Full outer joins 
FULL OUTER JOIN returns all records from both tables. You can think of it as a way of completely merging two tables.

Venn diagram with two circles labeled "left table" and "right table". Both circles are highlighted
You can review the syntax for using FULL OUTER JOIN in the following query:

SELECT *

FROM employees

FULL OUTER JOIN machines ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;

The results of a FULL OUTER JOIN query include all records from both tables. Similar to INNER JOIN, the order of tables does not change the results of the query.


reframe
SQL Joins (Inner and Outer Joins)

Joins in SQL are used to combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column. This is especially useful in cybersecurity and data analysis when information is spread across multiple datasets.

Inner Join

An INNER JOIN returns only the rows where there is a match in both tables based on a specified column.

It only includes matching records.
Non-matching rows are excluded.
All selected columns from both tables are returned.
Syntax
SELECT *
FROM employees
INNER JOIN machines
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Explanation
employees is the left table.
machines is the right table.
The join is performed using the common column device_id.
Only rows where device_id exists in both tables are included.
Important Note

If SELECT * is used, and both tables contain a column with the same name, that column will appear twice in the result.

Selecting Specific Columns

You can choose only the columns you need:

SELECT username, operating_system, employees.device_id
FROM employees
INNER JOIN machines
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Explanation
username and operating_system exist in only one table, so no table name is needed.
device_id exists in both tables, so it must be specified as employees.device_id.
Outer Joins

Outer joins return more data than inner joins by including unmatched rows from one or both tables.

Left Join

A LEFT JOIN returns:

All rows from the left (first) table
Matching rows from the right (second) table
NULL values where no match exists
Syntax
SELECT *
FROM employees
LEFT JOIN machines
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Explanation
All records from employees are included.
Only matching records from machines are returned.
If no match exists, machine-related fields show NULL.
Right Join

A RIGHT JOIN returns:

All rows from the right (second) table
Matching rows from the left (first) table
Syntax
SELECT *
FROM employees
RIGHT JOIN machines
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Explanation
All records from machines are included.
Only matching records from employees are included.
Non-matching employee data appears as NULL.
Important Note

A LEFT JOIN and RIGHT JOIN can produce the same result if the order of tables is reversed.

Example equivalent query:

SELECT *
FROM machines
RIGHT JOIN employees
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Full Outer Join

A FULL OUTER JOIN returns:

All rows from both tables
Matched and unmatched records combined
Syntax
SELECT *
FROM employees
FULL OUTER JOIN machines
ON employees.device_id = machines.device_id;
Explanation
Includes every record from both tables.
Matched rows are combined.
Unmatched rows appear with NULL values in missing fields.
Summary of Joins
Join Type	What It Returns
INNER JOIN	Only matching rows from both tables
LEFT JOIN	All rows from left table + matches from right
RIGHT JOIN	All rows from right table + matches from left
FULL OUTER JOIN	All rows from both tables












Aggregate Functions in SQL

Aggregate functions in SQL are used to perform calculations on multiple rows of data and return a single summarized result.

Instead of displaying all individual records, aggregate functions provide useful statistical or numerical summaries of the data.

Common Aggregate Functions

SQL provides several aggregate functions for analyzing data.

Function	Purpose
COUNT()	Counts the number of rows
AVG()	Calculates the average value
SUM()	Calculates the total sum
COUNT Function

The COUNT() function returns the number of records in a query result.

Syntax
SELECT COUNT(column_name)
FROM table_name;
Example: Count Total Customers
SELECT COUNT(firstname)
FROM customers;
Explanation
COUNT(firstname) counts the number of non-NULL values in the firstname column.
The query returns a single number representing the total number of customers.

The output contains:

One column: COUNT(firstname)
One row: the total count
COUNT with a Filter

Aggregate functions can also be combined with the WHERE clause to analyze specific subsets of data.

Example: Count Customers from the USA
SELECT COUNT(firstname)
FROM customers
WHERE country = 'USA';
Explanation
The WHERE clause filters records to customers located in the USA.
COUNT(firstname) counts only those filtered records.

The result is smaller because only USA customers are included.

AVG Function

The AVG() function calculates the average value of a numeric column.

Syntax
SELECT AVG(column_name)
FROM table_name;
Example
SELECT AVG(salary)
FROM employees;
Explanation

This query returns the average salary of all employees.

SUM Function

The SUM() function calculates the total of all numeric values in a column.

Syntax
SELECT SUM(column_name)
FROM table_name;
Example
SELECT SUM(quantity)
FROM orders;
Explanation

This query returns the total quantity of all orders combined.

Aggregate Function Syntax

All aggregate functions follow a similar structure:

SELECT FUNCTION(column_name)
FROM table_name;

Optional filtering can be added using WHERE.

Example:

SELECT AVG(score)
FROM students
WHERE grade = 'A';
Why Aggregate Functions Matter in Cybersecurity

Security analysts frequently use aggregate functions to summarize large amounts of security data.

Examples include:

Counting failed login attempts
Calculating average connection duration
Summing network traffic volume
Measuring total security events
Tracking alert frequency

These functions help analysts quickly identify trends, anomalies, and suspicious behavior.

Continuing to Learn SQL

SQL contains many more functions and advanced features beyond basic queries and filtering.

To improve SQL skills:

Practice writing queries regularly
Explore different databases
Learn additional SQL functions
Experiment with real-world datasets
Search for SQL tutorials and exercises online

Hands-on practice is one of the best ways to build confidence with SQL and apply it effectively in cybersecurity work.











SQL and Database Terminology
Database

An organized collection of data or information that is stored electronically and can be easily accessed, managed, and updated.

Date and Time Data

Data that represents specific dates, times, or both. This type of data is commonly used in logs, timestamps, and event tracking.

Exclusive Operator

An operator that does not include the comparison value in the result.

Example:

>
<
Filtering

The process of retrieving only the data that matches a specific condition or criteria.

Example:

WHERE country = 'USA'
Foreign Key

A column in one table that references the primary key of another table, creating a relationship between the two tables.

Inclusive Operator

An operator that includes the comparison value in the result.

Example:

>=
<=
Log

A record of events or activities that occur within a system, application, or network.

Examples include:

Login attempts
System errors
File access events
Numeric Data

Data made up of numbers and used for calculations or measurements.

Examples:

Login counts
Network traffic volume
File sizes
Operator

A symbol or keyword used to perform an operation in SQL.

Examples:

AND
OR
NOT
=
>
<
Primary Key

A column in a table where every row contains a unique value. It uniquely identifies each record in the table.

Example:

customer_id
employee_id
Query

A request made to a database to retrieve, filter, modify, or analyze data.

Example:

SELECT * FROM employees;
Relational Database

A structured database that organizes data into related tables connected through keys.

Examples:

MySQL
PostgreSQL
SQLite
String Data

Data consisting of text or characters arranged in a sequence.

Examples:

Usernames
Email addresses
Country names
SQL (Structured Query Language)

A programming language used to create, manage, and retrieve information from databases.

SQL is commonly used for:

Querying data
Filtering records
Updating tables
Managing databases
Syntax

The set of rules that defines the correct structure and format of commands in a programming or query language.

Example:

SELECT firstname FROM customers;
Wildcard

A special character used to represent one or more unknown characters in a search pattern.

Example:

%
_

Used with:

LIKE

Example query:

WHERE country LIKE 'MEX%'

This matches:

MEX
MEXICO
Any value beginning with “MEX”